UR

IB
U

U

E PL

NU

Congressional Record

M

S

United States
of America

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE

Vol. 172

119 th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION

WASHINGTON, WEDNESDAY, MARCH 4, 2026

No. 41

House of Representatives
The House met at 10 a.m. and was
called to order by the Speaker pro tempore (Mr. NORMAN).
f

DESIGNATION OF SPEAKER PRO
TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore laid before the House the following communication from the Speaker:
WASHINGTON, DC,
March 4, 2026.
I hereby appoint the Honorable RALPH
NORMAN to act as Speaker pro tempore on
this day.
MIKE JOHNSON,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
f

MORNING-HOUR DEBATE
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of January 6, 2026, the Chair will now recognize
Members from lists submitted by the
majority and minority leaders for
morning-hour debate.
The Chair will alternate recognition
between the parties, with time equally
allocated between the parties and each
Member other than the majority and
minority leaders and the minority
whip limited to 5 minutes, but in no
event shall debate continue beyond
11:50 a.m.
f

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

RECOGNIZING THE 300TH SESSION
OF THE ALVIN BROOKS WEDNESDAY NIGHT BLACK MEN CHATS
(Mr. CLEAVER of Missouri was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. CLEAVER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor a towering figure in the
history of Kansas City, Missouri, and
in the life of Missouri’s Fifth Congressional District, Mr. Alvin Brooks, on
the occasion of the 300th consecutive
meeting of the Alvin Brooks Wednesday night Black men’s chats.
That is 300 consecutive weeks. That
is 300 consecutive weeks of showing up,

300 sacred spaces for dialogue, and 300
opportunities for healing, mentorship,
accountability, and growth.
At age 93 years young, Mr. Brooks
has not only witnessed history, he has
helped shape it.
As a young man growing up in the
super-segregated city called Kansas
City, Alvin Brooks refused to accept
the limitations imposed on him by racism and injustice. At a time when the
color of our skin too often determined
the boundaries of our opportunity, Mr.
Brooks chose courage. He chose service. He chose to become one of Kansas
City’s few Black police officers in 1954.
That decision was not only about a
career. It was about breaking barriers.
It
was
about
ensuring
that
marginalized voices would have a place
where they could be heard.
Alvin Brooks was a mover and shaker. Throughout his distinguished career
in law enforcement, Mr. Brooks became a crucial pillar of our community. He served not only as an officer
but as a bridge-builder. He served not
only as a public servant, but as a civil
rights advocate. He served not only as
a leader within the department, but
eventually as president of the Kansas
City, Missouri, Board of Police Commissioners.
Even beyond those titles, Mr. Brooks
has always been what Kansas City
knows him to be: a steady presence in
moments of crisis, a trusted voice in
times of unrest, and a moral compass
when our city needs clarity and calmness.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., once
said, ‘‘Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that.’’ Alvin
Brooks has been and continues to be
that light: a light of nonviolence, a
light of racial reconciliation, a light of
justice, and a light to show the way for
the changing and coming generations.
Even at an age when many would
have long ago stepped back, Mr. Brooks
stepped up. In the midst of a global

pandemic in 2020, a time of isolation,
anxiety, and national reckoning, Mr.
Brooks established the Alvin Brooks
Wednesday night Black men’s chats.
What began as a virtual gathering became something extraordinary, a consistent intergenerational forum bringing together men from across Missouri
and eventually from across the whole
Nation. The discussions included faith
and public policy, civil rights, education, public health, the history of the
Negro Leagues, and the urgent issues
facing Black communities in America.
For nearly six uninterrupted years,
Mr. Brooks has convened those meetings every single week. The chats have
brought together civic leaders, education, faith leaders, civil rights advocates, students from historically Black
colleges and universities and public officials, including Members of this very
House in a space rooted in respect and
growth.
That consistency is not accidental. It
is a reflection of how Alvin Brooks has
always been and will always be.
His commitment to service extends
even further through the work of a
civil rights leader and as a former
member of the Hickman Mills school
board, where he continued to invest in
the future of Kansas City’s children. He
understands that community empowerment begins with education and that
equity must be built generation by
generation.
Mr. Speaker, what makes this milestone so powerful is not just the number 300. It is the discipline, faith, and
the love behind it.
In an era when civic discourse can
feel fractured and fleeting, Mr. Brooks
reminds us that democracy is strengthened in small rooms and virtual gatherings just as much as it is on this
floor. He reminds us that leadership is
not about spotlight but stewardship.
For decades, Alvin Brooks has carried the mantle of responsibility with
grace, helping guide communities
through pain and progress alike.

b This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m.
Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor.
H2373

.
VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:13 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.000

H04MRPT1

H2374

Today, as we recognize this historic
man, this giant of a man, his legacy of
resilience and courage and service
without ego will continue.
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Mr.
Alvin Brooks.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN IS
THE WORLD’S LEADING STATE
SPONSOR OF TERRORISM.
(Mr. BAUMGARTNER of Washington
was recognized to address the House for
5 minutes.)
Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker,
for nearly half a century, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the world’s leading
state sponsor of terrorism, has brutally
targeted and killed Americans.
Through its own forces and its network of proxy militias, Iran has killed
and injured thousands of Americans:
diplomats, servicemembers, and civilians alike. No other terrorist regime
has claimed more American lives.
When the Ayatollahs of Iran chant
‘‘death to America,’’ they mean it.
President Trump’s bold and decisive
actions have helped protect American
lives and defended our national interests.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to remind
this body of the Iranian regime’s ongoing and bloody campaign against the
American people.
The following is only a partial
record.
November 1979: Iranian students,
backed by the regime, seized our embassy in Tehran and took 66 Americans
for 444 days.
April 1983: an Iran-backed terrorist
group bombed the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, killing 77 Americans.
October 1983: Iran-backed Hezbollah
terrorists bombed the marine barracks
in Beirut, killing 241 U.S. military personnel, including 220 Marines.
March 1984: Iran-backed terrorists
kidnapped CIA Station Chief William
Buckley in Beirut. He later died in captivity.
July 1989: Iran-backed Hezbollah terrorists murdered U.S. Marine Colonel
William Higgins after kidnapping him
while he was serving on a U.N. peacekeeping mission.
Throughout the 1990s, Iran-backed
terrorists repeatedly targeted Americans in Israel and the Palestinian territories.
April 1995: a car bomb in the Gaza
strip killed eight people, including one
American citizen.
1995 through 1997: a series of suicide
bombings on buses and shopping districts and public places in Jerusalem
and Tel Aviv killed and wounded American citizens and dual nationals.
June 1996: Hezbollah terrorists directed by Iran bombed the Khobar
Towers housing complex in Saudi Arabia, killing 19 U.S. airmen and wounding hundreds more.
August 1998: al-Qaida suicide bombers,
facilitated
by
Iran-backed
Hezbollah, bombed our embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania, killing 224 people,
including dozens of Americans.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:13 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

In the 2000s, Iran and its proxies continued targeting Americans, including
multiple bombings in Jerusalem and at
Hebrew University that killed and
wounded American citizens.
October 2003: Iran-backed terrorists
killed three U.S. diplomatic personnel
in a bombing in Gaza.
Between 2003 and 2011, Iran-backed
militias killed at least 603 U.S. troops
in Iraq, roughly one in six of every
Americans killed in combat and fatalities in that war, including some of my
friends.
March 2007: former FBI agent Robert
Levinson disappeared in Iran and is believed to have died in an Iranian prison, becoming one of the longest held
American captives in history.
In the last decade, the pattern has
continued.
December 2019: Iran-backed Kataib
Hezbollah terrorists killed an American contractor and wounded U.S. servicemembers in a rocket attack in Iraq.
January 2020: Iranian ballistic missile attack on Ain al-Asad airbase in
Iraq left 109 U.S. troops with traumatic
brain injuries.
February 2021 and July 2021: Iranbacked militias launched rocket and
drone attacks that wounded U.S. servicemembers and American contractors
in Iraq and Syria.
September 2022 and November 2022:
Iran and IRGC-linked operatives killed
American citizens in Iraqi Kurdistan
and Baghdad.
March 2023: an Iranian drone strike
on a coalition base in Syria killed an
American contractor and wounded five
U.S. servicemembers and another contractor.
October 7, 2023: Iran-backed Hamas
terrorists murdered 46 Americans and
kidnapped at least a dozen more in the
October 7 massacre.
Between 2023 and November 2024: Iran
and its proxies conducted more than
180 attacks on U.S. Forces in the Middle East, wounding over 180 American
servicemembers and killing three.
January 2024: Iran-backed Kataib
Hezbollah terrorists killed three U.S.
servicemembers and wounded more
than 40 in a drone attack on a U.S. base
in Jordan.
November 2024: an Iranian national
and IRGC asset was charged in a plot
to assassinate President Trump on behalf of the Iranian regime.
June 2025: Iran-backed militias attacked multiple U.S. bases in Syria and
Iraq, again targeting American troops.
Mr. Speaker, this is only a partial
list of Iran’s bloody war on American
citizens. For decades, administrations
of both parties have understood this
threat. President Trump’s actions are
part of a necessary effort to defend
American lives. I spent a lot of time in
the Middle East in a lot of places, and
there has been one constant: Iranianbacked terrorist groups have always
been trying to kill Americans. That
ends now.

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

DEATH OF NURUL AMIN SHAH
ALAM
(Mr. KENNEDY of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. KENNEDY of New York. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today with a heavy
heart as our community and our Nation mourn a death that should have
never happened.
Nurul Amin Shah Alam was 56 years
old. He was a Rohingya refugee who
came to the U.S. legally after fleeing
persecution and violence in Burma,
searching for safety for himself and his
family.
He made his way to Buffalo, the city
of Good Neighbors.
He was nearly blind. He spoke very
little English. He could not read, write,
or navigate on his own. On February 19,
DHS gave Mr. Shah Alam what they
called a courtesy ride. That so-called
courtesy ride resulted in him being left
alone at a closed coffee shop miles
from his family’s home in the dead of
winter.
It would also be the last time Mr.
Shah Alam was seen alive. His family
was not notified. His attorney was not
notified. There was no coordinated
handoff, no protection for a man that
was a vulnerable individual with disabilities.
For 5 days, his loved ones checked
hospitals and shelters. They walked
the streets in search of Mr. Shah Alam,
and they waited for answers that would
never come.
b 1015
Mr. Shah Alam was tragically found
dead. His last known interaction was
with Kristi Noem’s Department of
Homeland Security. That fact alone demands a full and independent investigation. When someone in government
custody is abandoned and then found
dead, the American people deserve answers.
Under Trump and Kristi Noem, we
have seen a disgusting pattern of cruelty, inhumanity, and injustice from
their Department of Homeland Security. It is a pattern rooted in hate, division, and intolerance, with a willful
and complete disregard for human life.
Leadership matters. Accountability
matters. The Department of Homeland
Security under Kristi Noem has neither.
Our communities deserve a government that protects the vulnerable, not
one that drops them in the cold in the
dark of night.
The death of Nurul Amin Shah Alam
is a failure of our entire system. Those
at the top must answer for it, starting
with Kristi Noem.
Mr. Shah Alam should be alive today.
He came to our country seeking refuge.
Instead, his family laid him to rest last
week.
This should not be just another headline or more background noise to be
forgotten. A man is dead after being
abandoned by our government. His

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.002

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

family and the American people deserve the truth. We must have accountability and justice for the family of Mr.
Shah Alam. May he rest in peace.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

CELEBRATING CAROLINA RISING
(Mr. NORMAN of South Carolina was
recognized to address the House for 5
minutes.)
Mr. NORMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in recognition of the completion
of the Carolina Rising project in
Gaffney, South Carolina, along with
those dedicated individuals who have
worked tirelessly to bring this project
to fruition and to preserve, promote,
and shape the deep-rooted history of
Cherokee County. We thank them for
their dedication to this cause.
The Carolina Rising initiative is a
historic undertaking for South Carolina. It came about through the efforts
of Gaffney’s tourism administrator,
LeighAnn Moon. For nearly three decades, LeighAnn has worked tirelessly
to strengthen the community identity
and to expand rural tourism in
Gaffney, South Carolina.
From conversations with visitors,
LeighAnn quickly discovered many
were drawn to Cherokee County because of its historic background, its
Revolutionary War landmarks, and its
extensive resources.
This reality helped her shape Carolina Rising, a strategic effort to research, document, and interpret the
county’s contributions to America’s
independence in a way that is accessible to the public. It is now an innovative museum in the heart of Gaffney,
South Carolina.
This region was the site of numerous
historic battles, including both the
Battle of Kings Mountain and the Battle of Cowpens. Monumental American
victories here weakened British control in the backcountry and strengthened the patriot position at a decisive
moment in the war.
The Overmountain Victory National
Historic Trail also passes through the
area where the museum now sits,
marking the route taken by the United
States militia forces. These historic efforts proved critical to the outcome of
the revolution in South Carolina.
The museum’s construction came
about through the restoration and
reuse of the historic Carnegie Free Library in downtown Gaffney. Constructed in 1913, the Carnegie Free Library is one of only 14 libraries built in
South Carolina. For generations, it was
the center of literacy, research, and
civic engagement.
This project successfully transformed
the landmark into a modern museum
experience dedicated to the Revolutionary War in the region. It incorporates interactive exhibits, curated
artifacts, digital interpretation, and
educational programming. The facility
has space for lectures, student tours,
and historic research.
Carolina Rising simultaneously pays
tribute to Gaffney’s past while serving

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:13 Mar 05, 2026

H2375

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

as a resource for future South Carolinians.
Its launch is a tremendous success. It
has been over a decade in the making.
Yet, Carolina Rising represents more
than 14 years of planning and investment. It reflects constant collaboration among local leaders, State officials, preservation advocates, historians, and private supporters who all
share that commitment to honoring
our Nation’s past while strengthening
our local economy.
By expanding heritage tourism, supporting small businesses, and increasing downtown visitations, Carolina
Rising will contribute to sustained economic development in Gaffney and,
overall, Cherokee County.
I am very proud to say that Carolina
Rising demonstrates the planning, deep
respect for history, and stalwart confidence in the future of all South Carolinians, but particularly those in
Gaffney.
Mr. Speaker, I commend those who
have brought this initiative forward
and thank them for their continued
service to the people of South Carolina.
Their efforts have successfully seen
this project come together for our children, grandchildren, and generations to
come.
f

CHOOSING WAR IS NOT PEACE
THROUGH STRENGTH
(Mr. DOGGETT of Texas was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Speaker, as
Baghdad was first bombed 23 years ago,
Americans were bombarded with lies.
When that giant statue of Saddam Hussein was pulled down, the lies were
paired with attacks on all of us who opposed what was ultimately recognized
by almost all as a colossal American
blunder.
Though later President Bush announced ‘‘mission accomplished,’’ the
killing continued. Ultimately, over
4,400 American lives were lost and $2
trillion spent on this unwarranted invasion that, unfortunately, only benefited Iran.
Now, as Tehran is bombed, we are
once again being bombarded with lies.
Our trigger-happy President issued his
personal declaration of war without approval of Congress, without exhausting
nonviolent alternatives, and without
any real plan after the bombs stopped
falling.
Just months ago, Trump told the Nation that he had obliterated the Iranian nuclear capability. With no imminent threat to our country, he declared
war just because he likes issuing decrees.
He loves issuing imperial decrees,
whether it is imposing new tariff taxes,
obstructing our voting rights, or declaring himself the acting President of
Venezuela. It is the American people
who will pay the price in blood and
treasure for his military adventurism.
Trump callously has responded already ‘‘that’s the way it is’’ to the

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

deaths of American servicemembers
and so many innocent civilians. With
his war spreading across the Middle
East, Trump is not ruling out ground
troops, since airpower alone will not be
sufficient to accomplish the regime
change that he is obviously seeking.
While certainly not mourning the
death of Iranian tyrants, despicable
people, rarely has assassination of such
foreign leaders produced a peaceful result. Two decades of experience in Afghanistan and Iraq tell us that even
boots on the ground are insufficient to
accomplish a peaceful democratic society. Only the Iranian people can do
that.
Of course, Trump is also sending a
message to fellow authoritarians Xi
and Putin that might makes right. Use
war if it is helpful.
Ironically, we learned that President
Trump’s action does not demonstrate
strength, but rather weakness. Secretary Rubio has confirmed that
Trump
was
just
yielding
to
Netanyahu’s planned attack by saying,
essentially, ‘‘me, too.’’ He was too
weak to tell Netanyahu no, as President Bush had wisely done. Trump
talks tough and brandishes a very powerful military, but he cannot stand up
to powerful leaders like Netanyahu and
Putin.
Choosing war is not ‘‘peace through
strength.’’ It is a means of diverting
attention from multiple Trump failures here at home. Coming just after
revelations from the Justice Department of hiding documents accusing
Trump of sexually abusing a minor,
this war of choice may even be useful
as a distraction from the Epstein files
that have not been fully disclosed.
In Trump’s own words, this is a war
that could go on ‘‘as long as it takes,’’
perhaps as long as it takes for him to
interfere in the November elections
and secure a Congress that will continue to be little more than a doormat
for him.
With war so much easier to get into
than to get out of, it is imperative that
this Congress act swiftly this week to
approve the War Powers Resolution to
save American lives and stop another
destabilizing, bloody conflict that will
have repercussions for generations to
come.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
NORMAN). Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the President.
f

HONORING MARCEY PHILLIPS
(Mr. LUTTRELL of Texas was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. LUTTRELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to honor an extraordinary American. I am proud to recognize Ms.
Marcey Phillips, a fourth-generation
U.S. Army veteran, for her courageous
service to our Nation and her continued dedication to the men and women
who have worn the uniform.
Marcey comes from a family with a
strong tradition of military service. In

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.005

H04MRPT1

H2376

2002, she answered the call by enlisting
in the Texas Army National Guard,
where she served until 2010 in Missouri,
Georgia, and Fort Hood, Texas. In 2005,
she deployed to Iraq and was stationed
near Tikrit, one of the most dangerous
areas of operation during that conflict.
Like many who have served in combat, Marcey returned carrying invisible
wounds. The experiences of war took
their toll. In 2019, Marcey found a
trusted companion and a source of
healing in Beignet, a beautiful black
Labrador retriever who has been with
her ever since.
That hasn’t stopped Marcey. She
stepped forward time after time. She
continues to serve. She continues to be
a steadfast advocate for fellow veterans
through the Veterans of Foreign Wars.
Today, she proudly serves as the post
commander for VFW Post 4709 in Conroe, Texas, and as the District 17 commander at the State level.
She leads with integrity, purpose,
and commitment to every veteran post,
district, and community she serves.
Marcey Phillips exemplifies what it
means to serve in uniform and in life.
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a grateful
nation, we thank Marcey. We thank
her for her service. We thank her for
her sacrifice. We thank her for continuing to lead. We are honored to call
her an American hero.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING CONGRESSIONAL CIVIL
RIGHTS PILGRIMAGE
(Ms. SEWELL of Alabama was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. SEWELL. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
observance of the 61st anniversary of
Bloody Sunday and the annual Congressional Civil Rights Pilgrimage
through Alabama, which will take
place this weekend in Birmingham,
Montgomery, and my hometown of
Selma, Alabama.
Beginning this Friday, March 6, we in
Alabama will once again welcome
Members of Congress and dignitaries
from across the Nation to lay eyes on
the faces and places of the civil rights
and voting rights movement.
Hosted by the Faith and Politics Institute, we will retrace the footsteps of
civil rights giants and pay homage to
the sacrifices made in the name of
equality and justice for all.
Our pilgrimage will begin in Birmingham, where we will pay tribute to
the four little girls killed in the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church.
Together, we will reflect on the legacy
of visionary Birmingham leaders like
Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, who led
the fight against segregation alongside
Dr. King.
We will then travel to Montgomery,
Alabama—home to Rosa Parks, the
Freedom Rides Museum, and the Equal
Justice Initiative—where ordinary citizens took a bold stand against injustice.
We will conclude our pilgrimage by
crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge in

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

04:13 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

my hometown of Selma. We will commemorate the events of Bloody Sunday. Together, we will walk in the footsteps of our former colleague, the late,
great Congressman John Lewis, who
was beaten and bloodied by Alabama
State troopers while peacefully demonstrating for the rights of all Americans to vote.
This year’s pilgrimage could not
come at a more critical time in our Nation’s history. As we speak, officials at
the highest levels of government are
waging a concerted and coordinated effort to attack the rights and freedoms
secured by our foremothers and our
forefathers. They are attempting to
erase our history, to roll back our
progress, to silence our voices, and to
dilute our power.
Meanwhile, the fate of the Voting
Rights Act of 1965, the crown jewel of
the civil rights movement, hangs in the
balance as the Supreme Court considers a case that could gut its remaining protections.
b 1030
It is my hope that this year’s pilgrimage will serve not only as a reminder of our past but a roadmap for
our future.
Mr. Speaker, the foot soldiers of the
civil rights movement were tacticians
and strategists. In these troubled
times, we should take a page from
their playbook, because ‘‘good trouble,
necessary trouble’’ is needed now more
than ever.
Mr. Speaker, this year’s pilgrimage is
also bittersweet. It will be the last
time that we will be joined in our official capacity by Congressman and
former majority leader, STENY HOYER.
Congressman HOYER is retiring from
the House of Representatives this year,
and I pay special tribute to him and his
dedication for coming annually to the
pilgrimage. No one in this body has
been a more steadfast supporter of our
annual pilgrimage than Leader HOYER.
He made the trip to Alabama 18 times,
and this will be his 19th time commemorating Bloody Sunday.
I will always cherish the memories
we made alongside John Lewis and our
colleagues during the pilgrimage.
While he will be sorely missed in the
Halls of Congress, I know that Leader
HOYER’s service to our Nation will not
end with his retirement, and neither
will his dedication to protecting and
advancing our civil rights.
On behalf of Alabama’s Seventh Congressional District, I ask my colleagues
to join me in observing the 61st anniversary of Bloody Sunday and the upcoming annual Civil Rights Pilgrimage.
May we leave this weekend renewed,
refreshed, and ready to get into some
‘‘good trouble.’’
f

HONORING THE HONORABLE TIM
ARMSTEAD
(Mr. MOORE of West Virginia was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mr. MOORE of West Virginia. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to honor a remarkable West Virginian, devoted public servant, and a faithful Christian,
my friend, the Honorable Justice Tim
Armstead.
Justice Armstead dedicated his life
to serving the people of West Virginia
with unwavering integrity, conviction,
and grace. Born in Charleston on February 26, 1965, Tim graduated from the
University of Charleston and went on
to earn his juris doctorate from the
West Virginia University College of
Law.
After beginning his public service career as a press intern for my grandfather, Governor Arch Moore, Justice
Armstead went on to achieve a distinguished legacy defined by his strong
leadership, built on the back of his
Christian faith.
In 1998, Justice Armstead became a
member of the West Virginia House of
Delegates and served there for the next
two decades. During that time, Tim became the first Republican speaker of
the house in more than 80 years. Every
step of the way, Tim led from a firm
commitment to conservative principles
and an unparalleled witness to his
Christian faith.
In 2018, he was appointed to the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia. While there, his fidelity to the
rule of law and people of our State
truly shined, so much so that he served
twice as chief justice. He stewarded the
court through a challenging time and
worked tirelessly to restore public
trust in our judiciary.
Tim’s time as chief justice earned
him the distinction of being the first
West Virginian to ever ascend to the
top of both the legislature and the judiciary, a truly amazing accomplishment.
Tim joined his Lord in Heaven on August 26, 2025, and he is survived by his
beloved wife, Anna; his daughter,
Katie; and his two cherished grandchildren.
With his passing, West Virginia has
lost a principled leader, a dedicated jurist, a devoted family man, a committed Christian, and a dear friend. My
family and a grateful State will miss
him dearly.
Eternal rest, grant unto him, O Lord,
and may perpetual light shine upon
him.
f

SUICIDE PREVENTION FOR OUR
VETERANS
(Mrs. CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK of Florida was recognized to address the
House for 5 minutes.)
Mrs. CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK. Mr.
Speaker, I rise today to recognize our
veterans. They protect us in conflict.
They wear the uniform. They stand
watch in places that most of us will
never see, and then they come home to
stand in line.
In my district, the wait time for new
mental health appointments is 31 days.
It is 31 days. When you are battling an

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.006

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

invisible wound, 31 days isn’t a wait
list. It is a countdown or even condemnation.
We say that the statistics have gotten better, but better is unacceptable.
There are more than 16 million veterans in the United States. More than
1.5 million veterans call Florida home.
They are our neighbors, our children,
and our parents.
Still, on average, one veteran dies by
suicide every 65 minutes. By the time
we go to bed tonight, 17 chairs will sit
empty at dinner tables across America.
That is 17 folded flags and 17 families
staring at their phones that will never
ring again. It is not because they
weren’t strong enough. It is not because they didn’t fight hard enough,
but it is because we didn’t fight hard
enough to give them the services that
they deserve and need.
If we can send our sons and our
daughters into harm’s way, then it is
our duty to ensure that they have access to counseling, crisis services, and
the dignity of timely care when they
come home.
To our veterans who are watching,
they are not alone. Their service
mattered, and in this Congress, their
lives matter during and after, too.
Mr. Speaker, our veterans are not
lost, and they are always in our hearts.
They upheld their duty to us, and now
it is our duty to uphold our promise to
them—not in 31 days, not tomorrow,
but today and now.
To all of our veterans and our VSOs
who are here visiting on the Hill, we
thank them for their service and their
courage, and we will never stop fighting for them until we fulfill our promise to them.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING GLADYS WEST
(Ms. FOXX of North Carolina was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Ms. FOXX. Mr. Speaker, March is
Women’s History Month, a time when
we make an extra effort to honor and
recognize women across the United
States and the world who have made a
positive, sustained impact upon society.
The Wall Street Journal recently ran
an article honoring the life of Gladys
West, a brilliant mathematician who
played an integral role in creating GPS
technology.
Gladys was a 42-year civilian employee of the United States Navy. Due
to the classified nature of her work,
few individuals knew of her contributions to this now popular and essential
technology as it was being developed.
Here are quotes from the article I
have referenced:
‘‘In her 42-year career as a civilian
employee of the Navy, West learned to
program computers and solve mathematical problems she could never have
imagined in graduate school. Some of
her work involved measuring the precise contours of the Earth, on land and
at sea, allowing for the effects of tides

VerDate Sep 11 2014

04:13 Mar 05, 2026

H2377

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

and other forces. She was particularly
diligent about checking for accuracy.
The research was vital for creation of
the Global Positioning System, or
GPS, a priority for the U.S. military in
the 1970s and 1980s.’’
Ms. West was inducted into the Air
Force Space and Missile Pioneers Hall
of Fame in 2018 and was awarded the
President’s Award by the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers
for her work in helping create GPS.
Mr. Speaker, Ms. West’s story is one
of service, hard work, determination,
and perseverance, and I am quite certain that her story and accomplishments will continue to serve as an inspiration for generations of proud
Americans to come.
I thank Gladys’ family for sharing
her so wonderfully with the rest of the
world. I thank Gladys, even though she
is now gone, for the wonderful work
that she did in helping our country and
the world.
f

RECOGNIZING EMELIN THEATRE
(Mr. LATIMER of New York was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to salute the magnificent jewel
located in the heart of the village of
Mamaroneck, the Emelin Theatre.
The Emelin is a nonprofit organization that brings world-class performing
arts to all of Westchester, as well as
nearby Connecticut. The events at the
Emelin cover all genres of music, comedy, dance, family theater, and film. In
the next few weeks alone, there will be
performances highlighting Motown,
flamenco dance, southern rock, jazz,
cabaret standards, and numerous community events that will be hosted in
their spacious environment.
The professional staff, led by Taryn
Sacramone, ably directs and manages
all of the component parts of the
Emelin’s mission, and community commitment to the Emelin is exceptional,
led by Mark Ettenger, board president.
The generosity of the board of directors and the Friends of the Emelin provide the additional resources needed to
keep this asset thriving decades after
its inception.
From the floor of the House of Representatives, we recognize the tremendous presence of the Emelin in our
Westchester world.
RECOGNIZING NEW ROCHELLE BAR ASSOCIATION

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, in this
Chamber, we speak of this American
experiment in democracy that is 250
years in the making under principles
forged in our Constitution, the Bill of
Rights, and the laws of the judicial rulings that have followed. Yet, these
principles will die on the vine of history if they aren’t taught and absorbed
by each new generation of Americans.
One effort to keep those ideas alive is
found in the New Rochelle Bar Association’s unique outreach in the New Rochelle school system, the Lawyers in
the Classroom program.

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The New Rochelle Bar has signed up
members skilled in all elements of the
law to speak to elementary and middle
school students in the nearly 10 schools
in the district and make constitutional
principles come alive—amendments
with numbers that represent important
principles: the First Amendment, the
Second
Amendment,
the
Fourth
Amendment, and the 10th Amendment—helping young people understand, in everyday language, what
these principles mean in everyday life.
In addition to the educators at the
schools of Trinity, Jefferson, Columbus, Barnard, Webster, Davis, Ward, Albert Leonard, and Isaac Young, let me
recognize some of the long list of lawyers who have dedicated time for this
project: Mayor Yadira Ramos-Herbert,
Andy Spatz, Suzanne Berger, Jennifer
Pasquantonio, Regina Matos, David
Lacher, Artem Djukic, Adam Sattler,
Laurie
Korngold,
Jeffrey
Levin,
Michele
Tombini,
Barry
Salman,
Stephanie
Vetch,
Susan
Kettner,
Frank D’Onofrio, Michael Schiffer,
Julie Kattan, Christina Hall, Milton
Kreppel, and so many more—a real allstar lineup on the frontline team for
democracy.
CONGRATULATING BARRY AND BARBARA REITER

Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
congratulate a dynamic couple, Barry
and Barbara Reiter, as they plan to celebrate their 70th birthdays together
later this month.
Barry and I were in Mount Vernon
High School together all those years
ago. He is a tad younger than I am, but
he and Barbara have given years of
community service over and above
their professional careers and in raising their family. Their service in volunteer emergency services for their
town and Barry’s service on the town
council are just two examples.
Mr. Speaker, take it from one who
knows that age 70 is an achievement in
life and an opportunity to continue to
serve, and Barry and Barbara will.
From the floor of the House of Representatives, happy birthday to Barbara and Barry Reiter.
f

CONGRATULATING MORENCI HIGH
SCHOOL BOYS’ WRESTLING TEAM
(Mr. CISCOMANI of Arizona was recognized to address the House for 5 minutes.)
Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate the Morenci
High School boys’ wrestling team on
winning the Division IV wrestling title
for the 2025–2026 season.
The Morenci Wildcats totaled 214.5
points to win the Division IV title and
were led by three teammates who each
placed first overall in their weight
classes.
Jacob Goodwin won the 159-pound
championship with a total of four victories, with a total of three pins, as
well.
Emerson Montes won the 152-pound
title and secured a major decision in
the championship match.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.008

H04MRPT1

H2378

b 1045
Caden Woodall won the 167-pound
championship, with two pins during his
run for that championship.
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Coach
Casey Woodall, the whole team, and everyone who made this win possible.
Their hard work has made their school
and community very proud. The Wildcats should enjoy this victory. They
earned it. Here is to another successful
season and many more to come.
SAHUARITA HIGH SCHOOL BOYS’ WRESTLING WIN
DIVISION III STATE TITLE

Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to congratulate the Sahuarita
High School Boys’ Wrestling Team on
winning the Division III wrestling title
for the fifth consecutive season.
The Mustangs are only the fifth program in Arizona Interscholastic Association history to reach this milestone.
The team won the State title with a
total of 239 points, 92 points ahead of
the runners-up.
In addition, the Mustangs had five
team members who took first place in
their individual weight classes. Sophomore Marcus Killgore and senior Sebastian Serrano each won their individual weight class championship,
earning both of them their second
straight State titles. Additionally, senior James Buck and juniors Nathaniel
Gallardo and Sergio Macias also won
the title in their individual weight
classes.
This win also marks the seventh consecutive year that the Mustangs have
finished as State champions or as runner-up.
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Coach
Paul Vasquez, the whole team, and everyone who made this win possible.
Their hard work has made their school
and community very proud. The Mustangs should enjoy their victory. They
have earned this one. Here is to another successful season and many more
to come.
f

RECESS
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 12(a) of rule I, the Chair
declares the House in recess until noon
today.
Accordingly (at 10 o’clock and 46
minutes a.m.), the House stood in recess.
f

b 1200
AFTER RECESS
The recess having expired, the House
was called to order by the Speaker at
noon.
dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

PRAYER
The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret
Grun Kibben, offered the following
prayer:
Examine us, O God, and test us.
Search our hearts that we would prove
faithful, and test our minds that we

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

08:14 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

would receive wisdom. For You alone
are righteous. Let us be mindful of
Your truth and attentive to Your
Word.
Then judge us when we stray from
Your will. Judge between nations and
between neighbors in the resolution of
their discord. Settle the disputes that
have arisen from disdain and distrust
among peoples.
Take our weapons—our swords of war
and conflict—and transform them.
Take our words of bitterness and redeem them, that we would instead
wield tools of peace and reconciliation
in our time.
Grant us the hope that is found only
in You, a hope that promises a day
when there will be neither need nor appetite for war anymore.
In Your mercy, show us the way You
would have us go in our pursuit of freedom and democracy for our Nation and
in our desire for peace and security in
our world.
In Your sovereign name, we pray.
Amen.

stroy the missile capabilities, annihilate the naval assets, and ensure that
Iran can never have a nuclear weapon.
Senior Iranian despots and murderous Khamenei have been destroyed.
We grieve for the courageous servicemembers wounded and those who have
given the ultimate sacrifice for freedom.
In conclusion, God bless our troops as
the global war on terrorism continues.
Trump is reiterating peace through
strength, revealing war criminal Putin
lies, insulting Trump and mocking
Trump as Putin declares solidarity
with the Iranian mass murderers.
Our prayers are with devoted Indiana
Congressman JIM BAIRD upon the loss
of his wife, Danise.

f

H.R. 3377. An act to authorize the President to award the Medal of Honor to James
Capers, Jr., for acts of valor as a member of
the Marine Corps during the Vietnam War.
H.R. 7194. An act to authorize the President to award the Medal of Honor to Nicholas Dockery for acts of valor as a member of
the Army while serving in Afghanistan.
H.R. 7211. An act to authorize the President to award the Medal of Honor to John W.
Ripley for acts of valor during the Vietnam
War, and for other purposes.

THE JOURNAL
The SPEAKER. The Chair has examined the Journal of the last day’s proceedings and announces to the House
the approval thereof.
Pursuant to clause 1 of rule I, the
Journal stands approved.
f

f

MESSAGE FROM THE SENATE
A message from the Senate by Ms.
Lasky, one of its clerks, announced
that the Senate has passed without
amendment bills of the House of the
following titles:

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The SPEAKER. Will the gentleman
from South Carolina (Mr. WILSON)
come forward and lead the House in the
Pledge of Allegiance.
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina led
the Pledge of Allegiance as follows:

The message also announced that the
Senate has passed a bill of the following title in which the concurrence
of the House is requested:

I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

SALUTING MOUNT VERNON
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
(Mr. LATIMER asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. LATIMER. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
recognize the outstanding work of the
men and women who lead the Mount
Vernon Chamber of Commerce.
Every month, they hold a Zoom
meeting for all of their members and
provide the latest information of value
to the businessowners and retailers
who provide goods and services to the
people of Mount Vernon. The guest
speakers cover substantive topics such
as access to capital, tax preparation,
availability
of
grant
programs,
healthcare, personnel issues, tariffs,
and much more.
Every month, I join in virtually to
give a Federal issues update. The same
is true for county officials such as
County Executive Ken Jenkins and
Shari Rosen Ascher.
The chamber is led by Omar Fields,
chairman of the board; Anita Hunt,
board secretary; and former Mount
Vernon Councilwoman Lisa Copeland,
who serves as president. They do a tremendous service to the people and to

f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
The SPEAKER. The Chair will entertain up to 15 requests for 1-minute
speeches on each side of the aisle.
f

DEFENDING AMERICAN FAMILIES
(Mr. WILSON of South Carolina
asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, the Tehran regime is the head
of the snake of terrorism worldwide,
chanting death to America. They have
targeted, kidnapped, wounded, and
killed thousands of Americans for 47
years.
President Donald Trump repeatedly
sought peace, but the Iranian regime
boasted of 11 nuclear bombs, as exposed
by talented Envoy Steve Witkoff.
As a result, President Trump made
the decision with Israel to launch Operation Epic Fury, defending American
families. The objectives are clear: de-

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

S. 3971. An act to extend the SBIR and
STTR programs, and for other purposes.
f

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.011

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

the businesses of the city of Mount
Vernon.
From the floor of the House of Representatives, we salute the Mount
Vernon Chamber of Commerce.
f

HONORING SPECIAL AGENT EDEN
HOLGUIN
(Mr. JOHNSON of Louisiana asked
and was given permission to address
the House for 1 minute and to revise
and extend his remarks.)
Mr. JOHNSON of Louisiana. Mr.
Speaker, I begin today with some sad
news. On February 19, the House and
Senate community lost a beloved and
dedicated member of the United States
Capitol Police Force.
Special Agent Eden Holguin tragically passed away at only 41 years of
age. He was a proud veteran and a
former Texas State Trooper. For 3
years, he served admirably here as a
Capitol Police officer and as a special
agent. He was highly respected.
Law enforcement is a noble calling,
as we all know. It is one that is too
often thankless and always demanding.
These men and women stand guard on
the lines of justice and freedom. They
protect all of us who work here, as well
as the countless individuals and visitors who come to the United States
Capitol every day from across our Nation and across the world.
In the face of adversity and danger,
every day demands courage, diligence,
and professionalism. He brought that
every day.
We don’t take the duty lightly. It is
because of Agent Holguin, and so many
brave Americans like him, that Congress can carry out its constitutional
duties here, that we represent the
voices of our constituents, and that we
can effectuate the will of the American
people safely and freely.
Today, family, friends, and loved
ones of Agent Holguin will gather to
memorialize this hero in Lancaster,
Pennsylvania. I wanted to come here
on the House floor and acknowledge
him, as well. We thank them for standing by his side as Agent Holguin followed the demanding but noble path of
law enforcement. We want to let them
know that our prayers are with them
as they honor this brave patriot and
celebrate his life, all too short though
it was, of selfless sacrifice.
f

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

b 1210
NO NEW WARS
(Mr. QUIGLEY asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend his remarks.)
Mr. QUIGLEY. Mr. Speaker, in 1848, a
freshman Congressman from Illinois
wrote that the Constitution gives warmaking powers to Congress, and the
ability of one man to initiate a war
places our President where kings have
always stood. That was Abraham Lincoln.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

H2379

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Today, the American people do not
want another bloody, endless war, but
a President who campaigned on no new
wars is dragging this country and our
allies into a war with little explanation
and no clear long-term strategy.
The President has bluntly stated
that the deaths of American servicemembers are a price he is willing to
pay. Yet, just 6 months ago, he insisted
that Iran’s nuclear program had been
completely and totally obliterated.
If that was the case, then what is the
rationale for starting this war?
Our men and women in uniform are
not disposable. Americans want no part
of this war.
f

ENDOMETRIOSIS AWARENESS
(Mr. KENNEDY of Utah asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. KENNEDY of Utah. Mr. Speaker,
I rise today to shed light on endometriosis, a chronic and debilitating
condition affecting more than 6.5 million women across the United States.
Despite its prevalence, it often goes
undiagnosed for years. The journey to
diagnosis is long, an average of more
than 6 years from first symptoms to
definitive diagnosis. Raising awareness
is the first step to change.
That is why I thank Mary Alice Marriott Hatch for her partnership in
bringing a screening of ‘‘Below the
Belt’’ to Capitol Hill on March 18. I invite all of my congressional colleagues
to join us and learn more about this
important issue.
Mr. Speaker, awareness alone isn’t
enough. Investing in research, improving training for health professionals,
and removing barriers to care are essential steps. With proper funding and
attention, we can find effective treatments, improve quality of life, and
bring hope to millions.
I look forward to working with my
colleagues in a bipartisan fashion to
give endometriosis care the attention
that it deserves.
f

NO NEW WARS
(Mr. WALKINSHAW asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. WALKINSHAW. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to oppose President Trump’s
illegal, unconstitutional, and reckless
war in Iran.
We are 5 days in, and we have lost six
brave American servicemembers, and
thousands of Americans are stranded
abroad. My prayers are with their families and with everyone who is in
harm’s way.
After yesterday’s briefing, I am more
convinced than ever that there was no
imminent threat to America, and there
is no clear endgame strategy.
Americans
need
affordable
healthcare, groceries, and lower gas
prices, not a war that costs $220 million

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

a day and puts our troops in danger
without a clearly defined mission.
That is why I will vote for the bipartisan War Powers Resolution to rein in
this out-of-control President and end
his unauthorized hostilities in Iran.
f

KEEP OUR YOUNG PEOPLE OUT OF
HARM’S WAY
(Mr. GREEN of Texas asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. GREEN of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
and still I rise.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today to indicate
that I attended the classified briefing
yesterday. General Caine was there.
The Secretary of State was there. The
Secretary of War was there. I stayed
from start to finish.
Mr. Speaker, after hearing from
them, I have concluded that there was
not—N-O-T—an imminent threat to
this country, to my country, the country that I love.
I also concluded something else: that
we should not put our young people in
harm’s way such that they are losing
their lives, when the President knew or
should have known that there was no
imminent threat.
I will vote for the resolution. I believe it is an appropriate resolution,
and I trust that it will pass. Of course,
this is the Massie-Khanna resolution
that I speak of.
f

CELEBRATING DUB BALLARD ON
HIS CENTENNIAL BIRTHDAY
(Mr. WESTERMAN asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. WESTERMAN. Mr. Speaker, I extend my most sincere congratulations
to Hot Springs local Dub Ballard on his
100th birthday.
Reaching such a remarkable milestone is an achievement in itself, but
the life Dub has lived is especially worthy of recognition.
Mr. Ballard was born into a time
when a chuck roast cost 22 cents per
pound. He has seen our Nation move
and grow through times of hardship
and progress, all while calling the Natural State his home.
With grandparents who owned a local
grocery store, a mother who churned
butter and raised chickens to sell, and
a family farm growing cotton and corn,
Mr. Ballard inherited a family legacy
deeply rooted in commitment to his
community.
This legacy followed him into his
adult years. As a beloved husband, father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, Dub has led an exemplary life.
From working on his family farm at
age 6 to retiring from a long-tenured
career with Coca-Cola at the young age
of 98, Mr. Ballard is the definition of
hard work and grit.
As a valued member of The Church of
the Open Door and Hot Springs’ senior

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.014

H04MRPT1

H2380

softball team, Dub has certainly left an
indelible mark on his community. He
represents the true values that built
this Nation and continue to strengthen
it today.
May Dub’s 100th birthday be a celebration of a life well-lived and a legacy
that endures for generations to come.
f

HONORING STEVEN ROBERTI
(Mr. DESAULNIER asked and was
given permission to address the House
for 1 minute and to revise and extend
his remarks.)
Mr. DESAULNIER. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to recognize the life of a
friend and his service to his community in northern California and the
community I am so privileged to represent in Contra Costa County.
Steven Roberti developed a love for
service through his membership at a
young age in the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 302
in Martinez, California.
Steven served as manager of the
Contra Costa Labor Council from 1988
to 1996 and was later appointed to serve
as region 9 manager at the U.S. Department of Labor, overseeing labor affairs
across the Western United States during the Obama administration.
Steven also worked for the United
Way, Shelter Inc., and the Contra
Costa Regional Health Foundation.
Steven was a staunch advocate for
working people and will be remembered
for his lasting impact on the labor
movement in California and his dedicated public service.
Please join me in honoring this wonderful man’s memory, a fighter for
American workers, Steven Roberti.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

HONORING CORA VIGIL GOMEZ
(Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend her remarks.)
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I rise to honor the life and
legacy of Cora Vigil Gomez, one of the
first women on the Tribal Council for
the Jicarilla Apache Nation.
She lived a life of passion, self-reliance, service to the community, and
hard work. As one of the Tribal Council
members, she was instrumental in the
lawsuit against corporations who said
that you can’t tax them. She attended
the United States Supreme Court hearing, and that Nation established the
sovereign right of Tribes to impose taxation to fund their government.
She started an elderly meal program
where she actually butchered the sheep
herself and then delivered the meals. It
eventually became federally and State
funded and is now still serving the people of the region.
In the 1980s, she was one of only four
Native American representatives from
New Mexico for Title IV of the Older
Americans Act, which commenced the
Federal funding of Tribal programs for
elders.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, I am honored to have
represented Cora Vigil Gomez and her
Nation as an attorney and as her Representative.
I honor Councilwoman Gomez, and
am so sad for all of us now that she has
passed, but I am so glad that we can remember and be inspired by her for generations to come.
f

PROVIDING FOR CONSIDERATION
OF H.R. 7744, FURTHER ADDITIONAL
CONTINUING
APPROPRIATIONS ACT, 2026
Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, by direction
of the Committee on Rules, I call up
House Resolution 1095 and ask for its
immediate consideration.
The Clerk read the resolution, as follows:
H. RES. 1095
Resolved, That upon adoption of this resolution it shall be in order to consider in the
House the bill (H.R. 7744) making appropriations for the Department of Homeland Security for the fiscal year ending September 30,
2026, and for other purposes. All points of
order against consideration of the bill are
waived. The bill shall be considered as read.
All points of order against provisions in the
bill are waived. The previous question shall
be considered as ordered on the bill and on
any amendment thereto to final passage
without intervening motion except: (1) one
hour of debate equally divided and controlled
by the chair and ranking minority member
of the Committee on Appropriations or their
respective designees; and (2) one motion to
recommit.

The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
SIMPSON). The gentleman from Georgia
is recognized for 1 hour.
Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, for the purpose of debate only, I yield the customary 30 minutes to the gentlewoman
from
New
Mexico
(Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ), pending which I yield myself such time as I may consume. During consideration of this resolution, all
time yielded is for the purpose of debate only.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days in which to revise and extend their remarks.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Georgia?
There was no objection.
b 1220
Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, last night the Committee on Rules met and granted a rule
providing for consideration of one
measure. The rule provides for consideration of H.R. 7744 under a closed rule.
The rule provides 1 hour of general debate equally divided and controlled by
the chair and ranking minority member on the Committee on Appropriations or their respective designees. Additionally, the rule provides for one
motion to recommit.
Mr. Speaker, nearly 3 weeks ago, on
February 13, my Democrat colleagues

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

irresponsibly and vindictively shut
down the Department of Homeland Security, crippling the capabilities of the
very Department charged with protecting the American people.
Leading up to that moment, I
brought forth a rule that allowed the
House to concur in the Senate amendments to H.R. 7148, the Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2026, legislation
that funded the remainder of the Federal Government through the end of
the fiscal year with the exception of
the Department of Homeland Security.
Despite previously agreeing to a bipartisan and bicameral approach to
fund the Department of Homeland Security through the end of the fiscal
year, including provisions for both
funding and enhanced oversight, Democrats reversed course at the last
minute and have since held this critical funding hostage, directly putting
the safety and security of the American people at risk.
Mr. Speaker, I return today to give
my Democrat colleagues the opportunity to reverse course on this dangerous lapse in leadership and move
legislation forward that provides full
funding for the personnel, training, and
technology necessary to protect our
homeland and keep our communities
safe, secure, and resilient.
The Department of Homeland Security oversees agencies responsible for
aviation security, border protection,
cyber defense, disaster response, maritime security, and counterterrorism
missions that directly impact the safety of millions of Americans every single day.
Simply put, a ‘‘yes’’ vote on today’s
rule is a vote to consider legislation
that will fully fund the Department of
Homeland Security, ensuring that the
agencies tasked with keeping the
American people safe, from counterterrorism to cybersecurity, to disaster response, are not weakened at a moment
when threats are rapidly increasing.
A ‘‘yes’’ vote on today’s rule is a vote
to stand with the men and women on
the frontlines of our national security,
from coastguardsmen to GSA officers,
to cyber defenders, law enforcement
personnel, and emergency responders
who are now working every day without pay to keep our country safe.
A ‘‘yes’’ vote on today’s rule is a vote
to consider legislation to end this Democrat shutdown of the Department of
Homeland Security and restore the resources necessary to defend the American people.
Mr. Speaker, the need to fully fund
the Department of Homeland Security
becomes even clearer when we consider
the serious global threats facing our
country today. For nearly 50 years, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, the number
one state sponsor of terrorism, has
called our great country the ‘‘Great
Satan’’ and indoctrinated generations
of its people with the chants of ‘‘Death
to America,’’ making clear its commitment to our destruction.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.016

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026

Despite repeated attempts at diplomacy, the regime has relentlessly pursued a nuclear weapon, developed its
ballistic missile program, and funded
proxy terrorist organizations across
the world, all while its own people suffer under corruption, repression, and
economic collapse.
This past Saturday, President Donald
J. Trump kept his promise, decisively
authorizing Operation Epic Fury, a
large-scale kinetic military operation
targeting key regime military infrastructure and leadership responsible
for incessant aggression and attacks
against the United States and our allies.
This moment did not occur in isolation. It was the result of decades of
sustained hostility by the Iranian regime toward the United States, just as
the maniacal Iranian regime was
reaching the nuclear weapon threshold.
To the American people, the timeline
is clear.
In November 1979, Iranian students,
backed by the regime, stormed the U.S.
Embassy in Tehran and held hostage 66
brave Americans for 444 days as they
beat them and subjected them to mock
executions and other forms of torture.
In October 1993, Hezbollah, an Iranian
proxy, killed 241 American military
servicemembers, including 220 marines
and 21 other service personnel in a
truck bombing at a Marine compound
in Beirut.
In June 1996, Iran-backed Hezbollah
terrorists killed 19 U.S. airmen and
wounded nearly 500 others in a truck
bombing at a U.S. Air Force housing
complex in Saudi Arabia.
Between 2003 and 2011, Iranian proxies killed at least 603 American troops
in Iraq, roughly one out of every six
American combat deaths in that war.
In January 2016, Iranian forces seized
two U.S. Navy boats and detained 10
U.S. sailors who were held at gunpoint,
forced to kneel with their hands behind
their heads, and filmed for propaganda
being released 15 hours later.
More recently, on October 7, 2023,
Iran-backed Hamas terrorists murdered
46 Americans and kidnapped 12 Americans in addition.
Between October 2023 and November
2024, Iran and its proxies carried out
more than 180 attacks on U.S. forces in
the region, killing American servicemembers and wounding American service personnel.
In July 2024, an Iranian national
linked to Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps attempted to assassinate
then-candidate for President, Donald J.
Trump, forcing his Presidential campaign, which I remember being a part
of it, to charter decoy planes to avoid
the threat.
In recent weeks, Iranian representatives continued to lie and negotiate in
bad faith, stalling peace talks as they
prepared offensive military threats
against American forces.
This pattern of aggression makes
crystal clear that these are not isolated incidents. They instead represent

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

H2381

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

a sustained and deliberate campaign by
the Iranian regime to target the United
States and undermine our national security.
This is precisely why decisive action
by our Commander in Chief, President
Donald J. Trump, was necessary. By
destroying Iran’s military capabilities,
its missile capabilities, dismantling its
naval strength, and ensuring that this
regime can never obtain a nuclear
weapon, President Trump and his administration have acted to protect the
American people and defend our national interests. This level of action is
only possible because of the strength of
the United States military.
During his first term, President Donald J. Trump rebuilt our military to a
level many thought would never be
possible. Through historic investments,
a renewed focus on modernization, and
the restoration of military readiness,
he ensured that today we possess the
strongest and most capable military
humanity has ever seen. It is that
peace through strength, rebuilt and restored, that made decisive operations
like Operation Epic Fury possible,
demonstrating to our adversaries that
the United States has both the capability and the resolve to act swiftly, effectively, and without hesitation to
protect the citizens of our country.
Mr. Speaker, during this operation,
six Americans bravely sacrificed their
lives to keep our homeland safe. May
we forever remember and honor their
legacy of selfless service to these
United States of America.
The threats facing our country today
do not stop at distant battlefields.
They can reach our networks, our borders, and our communities here at
home.
While Iran’s aggression is often discussed in terms of conflict in the Middle East, we must not forget that the
regime and its proxies also pose a direct threat to the American homeland.
Our Homeland Security and Intelligence agencies have warned that Iran
and its affiliates maintain the capability to conduct cyberattacks against
our utility services, direct espionage
campaigns within our borders, and potentially inspire or direct violence
within the United States, targeting
critical infrastructure, financial systems, and other central networks on
which millions of Americans rely.
That is why President Trump’s Department of Homeland Security plays
such a vital role in coordinating intelligence, strengthening cyber defenses,
securing transportation systems, and
protecting the American homeland
from emerging threats.
Mr. Speaker, border security is
homeland security. At a time when
hostile regimes and terrorist networks
continue to threaten the United
States, we cannot ignore the risks
posed by an unsecure border and inadequate vetting of individuals entering
our country. Ensuring that terrorists,
traffickers, and foreign operatives cannot exploit weakness in our immigra-

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tion system is a fundamental responsibility of the Department of Homeland
Security.
While security at our southern border has drastically improved and more
than 600,000 criminal aliens have been
deported under President Trump’s administration, millions of unvetted, illegal immigrants who entered our country during 4 years of the porous open
border under the Biden administration
still remain in the United States
today.
Among these illegal immigrants are
members of violent transnational
gangs, some of which have ties to Iranian-backed terror networks who
threaten the safety of American communities. At a time of heightened global tensions and increasing threats, the
presence of even one dangerous individual within our borders poses a serious risk to America.
If we look at results here at home
today, we have seen real progress in
safety and security under President
Trump, proof that his approach works
and can be trusted abroad.
Under President Trump’s leadership,
fentanyl deaths fell by 34 percent in
2025, as trafficking across our southern
border was cut in half. Violent crime
has declined nationwide, with homicides experiencing one of the largest
single-year drops on record. In cities
where enhanced enforcement has taken
place, the results have been even more
dramatic. Murders here in Washington,
D.C., have dropped 60 percent. Chicago
saw its lowest number of murders since
1965. Memphis saw 200 fewer murders
and a 40 percent decline in shootings.
New Orleans’ homicide rate reached its
lowest level in 50 years.
Mr. Speaker, these outcomes exemplify what strong leadership and commitment to law and order can achieve,
but maintaining that progress requires
a fully functional Homeland Security
apparatus.
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make
one thing clear for the record and for
everyone who is watching today: Despite what some of my Democrat colleagues may be telling their constituents, as they fear primary challenges
from the left, this debate is not about
funding ICE or CBP. Those agencies
were already fully funded through H.R.
1, the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, which
was enacted last year.
b 1230
This debate is about the rest of the
Department of Homeland Security, the
agencies responsible for counterterrorism, cybersecurity, disaster response,
aviation security, maritime security,
and other critical missions that protect the American homeland.
By refusing to fund the remainder of
the Department of Homeland Security,
my Democratic colleagues have left
critical Homeland Security missions
vulnerable at a time when threats
against our country are increasing.
The consequences of that decision are
already being felt.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.019

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2382

Due to the Democrats’ Homeland Security shutdown, our country’s cyber
defenses remain weakened, leaving
critical infrastructure like hospitals,
water systems, and energy grids more
vulnerable to attacks from adversaries
like Iran.
Due to the Democrats’ Homeland Security shutdown, our Coast Guard faces
disruptions to essential missions, like
search and rescue, port security, and
drug interdiction, while servicemembers in harm’s way are left without the
full support and pay that they deserve.
Due to Democrats’ Homeland Security shutdown, TSA officers who service airports like Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, as well as
other airports across our country, are
forced to work without pay, hurting
morale, straining staffing, and increasing the risk of security gaps, delays,
and disruptions in our airports.
Due to the Democrats’ Homeland Security shutdown, FEMA is stretched to
its limits, jeopardizing disaster response, recovery efforts, and preparedness as severe weather threatens communities across the country.
Passage of the resolution today allows the House of Representatives to
consider, debate, and pass legislation
that ends this Democrat shutdown and
fully funds the Department of Homeland Security, ensuring that agencies
charged with protecting the American
people are equipped with the resources
necessary to carry out their critical
missions without disruption.
Mr. Speaker, protecting the American people should never be a partisan
issue. Regardless of party, every Member of Congress has a responsibility to
ensure the agencies tasked with defending our homeland have the resources they need to do their jobs.
It should really be that simple.
I urge all of my colleagues to vote
‘‘yes’’ on House Resolution 1095 because it allows this House of Representatives to carry out its most fundamental duties: to govern, to safeguard the American people, and to confront the serious threats facing our
country today with strength, clarity,
and resolve.
A ‘‘yes’’ vote today allows us to end
the Democrats’ Homeland Security
shutdown and protects our homeland.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Mr. Speaker, six Americans are dead,
and bombs are falling on our consulates and bases and allies because
Trump has started what he has now
said could be a, in his words, forever
war. This is the same President who
said: ‘‘I am not going to start wars. I
am going to end them.’’
This is a President who has said
America First means no more wars.
This is a President who has betrayed—
he has betrayed those people who voted
for him expecting him to keep us out of
wars.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

He started this war as a matter of
choice because he wanted to. We have
heard over and over again that there
was no imminent threat, which is the
legal criteria. There was no congressional authorization.
Trump betrayed his own commitments, his own voters. Trump betrayed
them and betrayed those Republicans
who thought he was going to keep us
out of war, so you would think that Republicans who control this House
would bring us back into a session so
we could address this war, so we could
discuss: Is it legitimate? What can we
do? How do we exercise our Article I
power?
Why don’t you all want to exercise
the power that was given to you by
your voters? That is not what we are
doing today. Instead, we are here on a
rule that has one bill, and that bill is
so important. That is the only thing we
are going to cover. But guess what. We
already did it.
This is a rerun of a bad movie. It is
a rerun because there is nothing in this
bill that is not already in the bill that,
as the gentleman pointed out, was already passed.
The only thing that has changed
from when we last passed this very
same bill a few weeks ago was that ICE
and CBP have killed, arrested, detained, and terrorized more American
citizens.
When we last passed this bill, Alex
Pretti was alive. Alex Pretti had not
been killed. Alex Pretti’s Second
Amendment rights were still being
honored. That is what has changed.
What has changed is more people have
died in ICE custody.
What has changed is it has gotten
only worse. We have seen ICE officials
have to walk back their lies about
their encounters with citizens who
they have shot and beat up and arrested. That is the only thing we have
seen since this bill was last passed.
The reality is that the only way to
get DHS funded all together in a single
bill is for the White House, Senate, and
House to come to an agreement. They
are in negotiations to do that, but this
is the kind of thing where even though
negotiations are going on, the House
just wants to do the same thing over
and over again.
Do you know what, do you remember
that quote of when you do the same
thing over and over again with the
same results, it is actually a little bit
of madness?
I put up this letter because, while
House Republicans kind of don’t understand where Americans are, this 7year-old named Connor does. Connor
sent me this letter where he says: ICE,
no money. He put a whole bunch of
zeros after it. He doesn’t realize they
get a lot more than the $1 billion that
he set out here. As my colleagues
noted, they are already fully funded.
They have all that money from H.R. 1.
What Democrats have suggested is,
since they already acknowledge—he
said it on the floor—that they are fully

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

funded, why don’t we just pass a bill
that funds FEMA, that funds Coast
Guard, that funds these critical agencies over which there is no debate, no
controversy, and no need for negotiations?
They rejected that amendment last
night because if they really cared
about funding these critical agencies,
they would say let’s fund them, and
let’s take up the issues of how we make
sure that ICE and CBP protect Americans.
Not only is Connor worried, but a
parent told me when I was back home
that her child asked her two questions
as they drove home from school one
day. One question was: Mom, are elves
real? The second question was: Mom,
what do I do if ICE comes for me? What
do I do if ICE comes for you?
This is a little Latina student, a citizen, somebody whose family has been
in this country for generations, but
they are terrified because if you look
Latino, you are at risk.
They are unwilling to put any protections in to protect our families. They
are unwilling to put any protections in
to say: Don’t go into our schools. Don’t
go into our hospitals. Don’t go into our
churches. Preserve the places where
people should be able to go to feel safe.
For example, in Clovis, New Mexico,
ICE broke a car window at a health
clinic, a health clinic, and dragged the
father away. The mother had to run
into the health clinic to make sure
that there were no glass shards on the
baby’s skin because that window had
been shattered.
This is the kind of activity that they
are condoning. That baby was lucky
because we know that there are babies
like 2-month-old Juan Nicholas in
Texas who was sick in detention with
bronchitis and almost near death and
who was deported across the border
without any money, without any people who he would know.
b 1240
Thank heavens the goodness of the
American people helped that baby out.
I could tell story after story that
should make anybody who has a heart,
conscience, or moral values based on
any of our faith traditions cry and say:
This is not an America we believe in.
At least 3,800 children under age 18,
including 20 infants, were held in detention under the Trump administration in 2025 alone.
The cruelty continues far beyond
those thousands of kids, and it is not
just that they killed—they killed—citizen Alex Pretti and citizen Renee
Good. This is a pattern and practice of
ICE hurting our communities and violating the Constitution. Americans
who believe in law and order, respect
for constitutional rights, and who
don’t want government overreach
should be and are, indeed, outraged.
However, today, Republicans are,
once again, demanding more money for
the Department of Homeland Security’s ICE and CBP which they acknowledge has already been fully funded. In fact, we know that $150 billion of

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.021

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026

the money that we already sent to DHS
remains available to them. However,
now, as we heard, they are trying to
justify funding DHS by pointing to a
war that this President started without
a clear strategy and without the support of the American people.
Trump’s
chaos
is
everywhere.
Trump’s chaos comes with a price. It is
Americans who pay that price. There is
chaos abroad, chaos Congress did not
authorize, and chaos at home.
Let’s be clear about what is happening. While families are worried
about rising costs and while servicemembers’ lives are at risk, Republicans
want to write another blank check to
an agency that is already operating
with historic, unprecedented funding.
How much is this chaos costing us?
That is the question we should be
asking. We know just one piece of this
war: The three F–15 aircraft shot down
cost $300 million.
Mr. Speaker, do you know what that
$300 million could do?
It could fund 23 years of the Gabriella
Miller Kids First Pediatric Research
Program, 3 years of childhood cancer
and birth defects for just those three
F–15s that they put at risk. It would
fund the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
for 1 year to connect Americans with
lifesaving services and a compassionate
counselor. Three of those planes would
pay for another year of the Community
Development Financial Institutions
Fund, a fund that Trump wanted to
zero out. He wanted to zero out this
fund.
Think about it, Mr. Speaker.
What do those CDFIs mean?
They are your credit unions, the
places where you get your loans for
your cars and for your appliances or to
help with your home. That is what he
is willing to do because everything
comes at a cost, and they are willing to
pay money for this war of choice. That
money could be better spent at home
bringing down the cost of living for
Americans.
We know that 60 percent of Americans support redirecting ICE funding to
Medicaid
because
people
want
healthcare and stability, not raids,
abuse, and chaos.
Republicans keep burning money.
They keep burning money. They have
that $4 trillion debt from their big,
beautiful bill. We know the last time a
Republican took us into war in the
Middle East it cost trillions in our deficit. They are doing it again.
There they go. They are at it again.
What Democrats are asking for before we send more ICE funding is what
all law enforcement uses: mandatory
body cameras and judicial warrants before you break down somebody’s door.
Every law enforcement in America
does that.
Why can’t they?
Democrats ask for no masks.
What law enforcement officers go
around in masks except for theirs?
Democrats want no targeting of
schools, hospitals, houses of worship,
or polling places.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

H2383

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

These are sensible, community-driven policies.
We are also asking that ICE follow
the same constitutional principles that
every other law enforcement agency
follows.
Mr. Speaker, you can’t just beat up,
shoot, and kill people. It is not just
Democrats
saying
this.
Catholic
bishops from border States and beyond
are pleading with Congress to restore
protections at places of worship,
schools, and healthcare facilities so
families can seek care, learn, and pray
without fear.
If Republicans truly cared about security, then they would support these
kinds of reforms.
Mr. Speaker, why don’t you want to
let people pray without fear, I ask?
Trump wanted the Department of
War so he could wage war. Now he
wants a reckless ICE to have dangerous
amounts of money. However, Americans don’t have to choose between national security and safety and constitutional protections. We can have
all three. It just takes courage. It
takes courage over chaos, not blank
checks and not endless wars.
It is time to restore accountability
before we write another blank check
with a lot more zeros than poor Connor
can even imagine.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, I was half
hoping the gentlewoman from New
Mexico was going to rise to thank us
for giving her an opportunity to rectify
the wrong she inflicted upon the Department of Homeland Security 3
weeks ago when they neglected to fund
it, but based on her comments, it
doesn’t seem to be the case.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from New York (Mr.
GARBARINO), who is a rising star in our
Conference and the distinguished
chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security.
Mr. GARBARINO. Mr. Speaker, as
chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, I rise today in support
of the rule providing for consideration
of H.R. 7744.
As America faces heightened threats
on U.S. soil and abroad, DHS is in the
midst of its second major shutdown in
6 months because of Democrats’ political games.
This lapse in appropriations means a
disruption in our Nation’s disaster preparedness, transportation security, and
critical infrastructure resilience when
we need it most.
As a lifelong New Yorker, I find it
outrageous that DHS continues to be
undermined by Washington’s dysfunction. Twenty-five years after the worst
terrorist attack on U.S. soil, I urge my
Democratic colleagues to not forget
why this Department was established
in the first place.
As we speak, the vast majority of
DHS personnel are, once again, continuing their essential missions to protect the American people without

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

knowing when their next paycheck will
come, while others have been furloughed, further undermining our preparedness.
The frustrating reality is that this
was completely avoidable. House Republicans sent this bipartisan and bicameral deal on full-year DHS funding
to the Senate nearly 2 months ago.
This bill includes funding for body
cameras, support for the DHS Office of
Inspector General, additional resources
for training, and new transparency and
oversight requirements for ICE.
By holding this bill up in the Senate,
Democrats are also blocking funding
for FEMA’s preparedness, response, and
recovery efforts across the country.
They are blocking funding for TSA
ahead of major events like the World
Cup. Democrats are blocking funding
for Coast Guard operations that we use
to counter our adversaries. They are
blocking our funding for our cybersecurity workforce while Iran is attacking
us daily in our cybersecurity terrain.
The security of our homeland is not a
partisan talking point. It is an American imperative. Holding DHS hostage
when lives and livelihoods are on the
line is reckless.
Mr. Speaker, I urge House Democrats
to show their Senate counterparts that
the right thing to do is support this
bill.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Now that we are on the point of
thank-yous, my colleague suggested
that I get up and thank them for bringing this bill again.
I do think it is a waste of House resources doing the same thing over
again.
However, I do thank the gentleman
because we are able to make the point
again to the American people about
how bad ICE is. The American people
agree with us that what ICE is doing is
not American. It is not American to
kill
us
point-blank—murders—for
doing nothing more than using a phone
to video what they are doing.
Mr. Speaker, if we defeat the previous question, I will offer an amendment to the rule to bring up H.R. 7481,
the Department of Homeland Security
Appropriations Act, 2026, a bill which
fully funds law-abiding agencies under
the Department of Homeland Security
and not the unlawful actions of ICE
and CBP. That is because we agree that
we need to fund FEMA, TSA, and the
Coast Guard. There is no reason to
have these important agencies tied to
the funding for Trump’s ICE cruelty
agenda.
b 1250
Indeed,
Ranking
Member
ROSA
DELAURO introduced a bill to fund
FEMA, TSA, and the Coast Guard. Last
night, at Rules, I tried to make her bill
in order so the House could vote on it,
so the House could say, yes, we believe
in these agencies, and we want to fund
them. Every single Republican in the
committee voted against it.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.023

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2384

Let’s be honest about who is voting
against funding for the Coast Guard,
for TSA, and for these agencies. It is
Republicans. Republicans voted against
it last night, but we are going to ask
Republicans once again: Will they vote
to fund the Coast Guard, FEMA, and
TSA? We will ask whether they will
vote for that because we are going to
give them another opportunity to do
that. We are going to do that.
Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to insert the text of my amendment into the RECORD along with any
extraneous material immediately prior
to the vote on the previous question.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from New Mexico?
There was no objection.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the gentlewoman
from
Connecticut
(Ms.
DELAURO), the ranking member of the
Appropriations Committee and the
sponsor of this bill, to discuss our proposal further.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, the bill
at issue today is not a serious legislative effort. It is political theater.
Republican leadership is trying to
use President Trump’s aimless, costly,
and illegal war with Iran to force
through more funding for ICE and Customs and Border Protection without
the substantial changes that the vast
majority of Americans believe those
agencies need. It is a cynical effort,
and it is one that will fail.
If Republicans are actually serious
about the threat that President
Trump’s war with Iran has caused, then
they would move quickly to bring up
my bill. They rejected the amendment
last night in the Rules Committee, but
I will tell you what it would fund.
The bill would fund law-abiding components of DHS: Federal Emergency
Management Agency, FEMA; Disaster
Relief Fund; Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency; U.S. Coast
Guard; Transportation Security Administration, TSA; U.S. Secret Service;
Federal Law Enforcement Training
Centers; Science and Technology Directorate; Office of Inspector General;
and Federal Protective Service. These
are the agencies that are part of what
we ought to be funding and could fund
today if the Republicans wanted to do
it.
Mr. Speaker, they do not want to do
it because they support lawless, reckless agencies, ICE and Customs and
Border Patrol. We can set those aside
for further negotiations as those negotiations continue.
Unlike the bill Republicans have put
forward, my measure actually has a
good chance of passing if only the Republican leadership would allow it to
come forward with a vote.
If we defeat the previous question, I
will offer an amendment to the rule to
bring up my bill, H.R. 7481, so that
Members can vote to fund the law-abiding agencies within the Department of
Homeland Security.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

There is broad agreement on the
funding of these agencies. There is no
controversy over any of them. There is
significant controversy over ICE and
Customs and Border Protection because they have beaten, detained, harassed, and even killed law-abiding U.S.
citizens with zero accountability.
I ask my colleagues across the aisle,
why not allow funding for the parts of
Homeland Security that we have no
disagreements over? Let’s pass those,
allow that disaster relief to be replenished, allow TSA and Secret Service
agents to be paid, allow the Coast
Guard to support its servicemembers,
and ensure our cybersecurity measures
are in place.
We are going to negotiate reforms to
ICE and Customs and Border Protection. It is underway. What are those reforms? There is broad public support
for prohibiting the detention or deportation of U.S. citizens and prohibiting
operations at sensitive locations like
schools and houses of worship.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield an additional 1 minute
to the gentlewoman from Connecticut.
Ms. DELAURO. Mr. Speaker, there is
also support to require agencies to get
a warrant from a judge before kicking
in somebody’s door, require the removal of masks, require badges and
identification, allow independent investigations into wrongdoing, end racial profiling, and end roving patrols.
Let me just say what I am sick and
tired of is listening to the crocodile
tears that are being shed on the other
side of the aisle for the Federal employees who work at these agencies.
They couldn’t care less.
I will give you examples. The President’s budget had a $500 million cut to
cybersecurity. Where were they when
that happened? Where were they when
President Trump and Kristi Noem
talked about dismantling FEMA, the
Federal Emergency Management Agency? Where were they on all of these
bills when their guru, Elon Musk, said
a thousand people could go from the
cybersecurity agency?
There wasn’t a peep out of them for
that. It is disingenuous. They know it.
The public knows it. In fact, they want
to support ICE and CBP, but they don’t
want to support the Federal employees.
Vote ‘‘no’’ on the previous question.
Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, I yield 5
minutes to the gentleman from Florida
(Mr. FINE), a member of our freshman
class, one of the best-educated members of our Conference, and a champion
debater.
Mr. FINE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
angry. I rise angry by the stunning disparity between the priorities of the two
parties.
This week, Republicans’ number one
priority is to reopen the Department of
Homeland Security because our homeland is under threat, whereas Democrats’ number one priority, as we will
see this afternoon, is to stop and pro-

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tect those who would endanger our
homeland.
The U.S. Coast Guard is actively in
operations in Bahrain, protecting the
United States, and every one of those
brave individuals is not being paid. Not
only that, but the DHS Office of Counterterrorism and Homeland Threats is
not being paid to look after those who
would threaten us in the United States.
What has changed in the last 3
weeks? Let me give you some examples. Today is March 4. Two days ago in
Michigan, Islamic scholar and expert
in Islam Hassanain Rajabali said the
following
about
the
killing
of
Khamenei: Why do we keep hearing our
leaders—this is someone in America referring to Khamenei as ‘‘our leader’’—
why are we hearing our leaders are
being killed and the other side does
not? It will come. Don’t worry. ‘‘Mahdi
will cut tentacles of Rothschilds.’’
We need Homeland Security to protect us from this guy.
On February 28, someone who came
to Michigan in 1991, who got two degrees at American universities, Dearborn Heights Imam—a religious leader
running a mosque—Mohammad Ali
Elahi eulogized Khamenei: He would
have loved to end his life this way—
being killed by the most wretched
hands on Earth—speaking about the
United States. Even Democrats believe
Khamenei was a bad guy. Nothing is
greater than martyrdom after 86 years
of service.
We need DHS to be funded to protect
us from this guy.
Third example: A taxpayer-funded
government employee working at
Henry Ford Community College in
Dearborn, Ali Akbar Shdid: Trump
made a huge mistake by killing our
leader—again, ‘‘our leader’’ being
Khamenei. He continued: We are going
to continue on his path. We are going
to hold his blood and ideology and
teach it to our children.
We are paying for this. We need DHS
to protect us from this guy. That is
just Michigan.
State number two, California: February 28, someone who came from Iraq
to the United States in 1994, another
Muslim scholar, an expert in Islam, Dr.
Sayed Moustafa Qazwini, a Ph.D.: I
pray to exit life as a martyr. Like
Khamenei, may Allah be pleased with
him, not in bed, home, or hospital.
DHS needs to protect us from him.
b 1300
Mr. Speaker, down the road in Virginia, a mosque in Manassas honoring
what they call, again, our leader,
Khamenei, extending condolences and
glad tidings on his martyrdom.
By the way, these are not being captured with a hidden microphone. They
are proudly broadcasting this.
In New York, Zohran Mamdani, February 20, attended a mosque with
known ties to Iran and sat there as the
imam prayed for the Mahdi to kill the
infidels by his sword. We need DHS
open to protect us from that.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.025

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026

This is personal for me. In Austin, a
Muslim terrorist, who never should
have been in this country, just killed
three people, and I will talk about him
in a bit.
He retweeted, commented on one of
my tweets, upset about my criticism of
the kind of terrorism that he so engaged in. I didn’t find it. So lest any
Member of Congress think these
threats are not real, if they can do it to
me, they can do it to any one of you.
I will close with this. We hear the
names of the two who died in Minnesota, but how do we not say the
names of Ryder Harrington, Savitha
Shan, and Jorge Pederson, who were
killed by that man in Austin.
We need the Department of Homeland Security open to protect us from
them. How many Americans are going
to die while the Department of Homeland Security is closed? We swore an
oath to protect Americans, not to protect terrorists. We need to get the Department of Homeland Security open
so that we can live up to that obligation.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Mr. Speaker, we can get DHS open if
Republicans would vote to return this
bill so that we could, indeed, fund
FEMA, the Coast Guard, and the other
agencies.
Let’s talk a little bit about FEMA
because what we are seeing this President do is use this moment to make
life more miserable for Americans.
FEMA has $4 billion in Disaster Relief
Fund. Even though it has that money,
DHS is shutting down assistance to
victims. It is doing that even though it
has the money.
This is just like what Trump did last
time where he had the money for nutrition assistance to fund SNAP and he
said no. I would prefer that children go
hungry, even though I have the money
in the bank.
This shouldn’t be surprising given
Secretary Noem’s record. She has put
roadblock after roadblock to actually
let FEMA do work. She says anything
over $100,000 has to come to my office.
That didn’t stop her from giving away
several millions of dollars in ad funding to somebody related to her because
this is, indeed, a corrupt administration. There is corruption at the highest
level, and we see that over and over
again.
When we talk about U.S. citizens
harmed, let’s talk about U.S. citizens
harmed by our own agency.
Marimar Martinez was a teaching assistant. She was shot five times by a
Border Patrol agent in October. She
was in a car. That agent said, bragging:
‘‘I fired five rounds, and she had seven
holes.’’ He had to recant their allegations that she had done anything
wrong.
George Retes, a former Army infantryman and disabled veteran, pulled
out of his car telling ICE: I am a veteran. I am a citizen. He then spent

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

H2385

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

time in detention. He came to the
House and was a guest for the State of
the Union Address. We got to meet
him.
Peter Yazzie, a Navajo Nation, our
first Americans, and Laguna Pueblo
member, was detained by ICE members. He told them: I am a Native
American. I have my Certificate of Indian Blood. He was detained, arrested,
abused in that moment.
Jose Roberto ‘‘Beto’’ Ramirez, 20year-old member of the Ojibwe Nation,
was yanked from the passenger’s seat
of his aunt’s car, slammed on the hood,
handcuffed, and held in custody.
Aliya Rahman is a disabled social activist. She had her windows broken,
pulled out by force, and experienced
shooting pain.
These are citizens. These are citizens,
and they don’t seem to care. It is something when you can’t control the horrible actions.
We condemn the terrorism. We condemn the Ayatollah. We condemn all of
that. We don’t control them, but we
sure should control our own agents and
our own agencies.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Maryland (Mr. HOYER)
to discuss more about this bill and
what all this means. He has led and inspired us in so many different times,
and I look forward to listening to him.
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Speaker, I will
speak to the American people through
you, so I address the Speaker and the
American people.
You must be confused by this debate.
We have two relatively new Members
of the Congress who have spoken. I
came in as Mr. JACK was speaking and
he said that we need to open DHS. We
certainly have agreement on about 80
percent of that, but the Republicans
are saying unless you agree to 100 percent, we are not going to agree to opening DHS that ought to be opened during this time of war.
The Secret Service could be funded
this afternoon. The Speaker just has to
say the word because our side will vote
to open up the agencies, but we have a
difference of opinion with respect to
two components of DHS that we believe are violating the Constitution of
the United States.
We agree that we ought to open Secret Service. We agree that we ought to
open FEMA. We agree that we ought to
open cybersecurity, but what is your
answer to saying: But if you don’t do it
all, we will not open those agencies and
have the employees paid, who, of
course, are critical employees.
You don’t have an answer to that
other than you want to muscle through
something that has been questioned by
many courts in this land.
Now let me read you a statement
that was made by the border czar.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield an additional 1 minute
to the gentleman from Maryland.
Mr. HOYER. After a court said you
must do this, the border czar, Tom

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Homan, who was in Minneapolis, who—
by the way, Border Patrol killed Alex
Pretti. Here is what the border czar
said. Perhaps you don’t care, but he
said this: ‘‘I don’t care what the judges
think.’’ ‘‘I don’t care . . . ’’
Yes, we here on this floor, and the
Democrats on the floor in the United
States Senate believe that is improper
policy for law enforcement to say, to
do, to act, to threaten people with: I
don’t care what the judges say.
Bring Ms. DELAURO’s bill to the floor.
It will pass. It will pass this afternoon,
and all of those agents you have mentioned will be funded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has again expired.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield an additional 30 seconds to the gentleman from Maryland.
Mr. HOYER. In addition to that, I
don’t know that I have heard it mentioned, but in the bill that was passed
earlier this year, DHS was funded. ICE
was funded with $150 billion, so don’t
get on this floor and pretend that
somehow it is not funded because that
is not true.
Bring this bill to the floor. We agree
on it overwhelmingly. Do not allow the
disagreement to undermine the agreement we have, particularly at a time of
war when we ought to be united.
b 1310
Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, just to respond briefly,
first and foremost, if the gentleman
had listened to my opening remarks, as
he suggested he did, he would know
that we noted that we, in fact, funded
CBP and ICE last year.
This is about funding the Coast
Guard and TSA. This is what today’s
vote is about.
That is why we hear the consternation from the other side. It is because
they take bad vote after bad vote after
bad vote. We are giving them a chance
to rectify that today.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from California (Mr. FONG),
a friend before we both were elected to
Congress.
Mr. FONG. Mr. Speaker, last month,
the U.S. House of Representatives
passed a bipartisan funding package for
the Department of Homeland Security.
It is regrettable that Senate Democrats chose to abandon a bipartisan
and bicameral deal on full-year DHS
funding, jeopardizing our safety and security here at home.
Today, we face growing threats as
our Nation encounters the real danger
posed by the Iranian regime, as well as
other adversaries around the world. It
is critical that we ensure the agencies
tasked with protecting our Nation are
fully operational, are at full strength,
and have the resources needed to neutralize any potential threats to our
homeland.
As congressional Democrats continue
to play partisan games, they are weakening our cybersecurity operations,

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.027

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2386

disrupting critical intelligence sharing,
and forcing over 250,000 public servants
supporting our national security to go
without pay. This includes critical personnel from TSA, who work every day
to prevent terror attacks, and from
FEMA, who support our communities
in the wake of disasters.
This is the second time in the past 4
months that TSA workers are working
without pay. During the last shutdown,
TSA saw increased rates of unscheduled absences and localized spikes in
wait times, which are expected again
during the shutdown as spring travel
begins to rise.
In my home State of California, we
continue preparations to host major
international events like the 2026 FIFA
World Cup, which begins this coming
June, followed by the 2028 Summer
Olympic Games. The World Cup will be
the largest sporting event in history,
with upward of 5 million international
fans traveling to the United States.
The safety and success of these global events hinge on DHS’ ability to
maintain mission readiness. The longer
this partial shutdown continues, the
weaker our ability to prepare for these
events becomes. To delay any longer is
to risk the lives of countless Americans and millions of international visitors alike.
This week, the House will vote once
again to reopen DHS and reaffirm its
commitment to public safety. I urge
my colleagues across the aisle to join
us in voting to reopen the Department
of Homeland Security so it can get
back to its core mission of safeguarding American communities.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield 30 seconds to the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. HOYER).
Mr. HOYER. Mr. Speaker, frankly,
these new Members of Congress apparently don’t know what I am saying. We
will vote to open DHS, including the
Secretary’s office, this afternoon, 1
hour from now, 2 hours from now.
Bring it to the floor. Do not put in it
what we all call a poison pill, and that
is two components that are already
funded—already funded.
Democrats and Republicans together
can start paying the others today, but
for the objection to the unanimous
consent.
Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, I think it is
disappointing that the gentleman from
Maryland refers to funding our Border
Patrol and funding those who keep our
borders safe as poison pills. That is his
prerogative, not mine.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the
gentlewoman from South Carolina
(Mrs. BIGGS), a member of our freshman class, one of the highest ranking
female military officers in the history
of the House of Representatives, a combat veteran, and a lieutenant colonel.
Mrs. BIGGS of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentleman from
Georgia for recognizing me.
Mr. Speaker, America has dealt a
clear and decisive blow to the Iranian
terrorist regime. In times like this, we

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

have to stay vigilant here at home.
Rogue terrorists look for ways to
strike back and create chaos. In some
cases, they already have.
Right now, the Department of Homeland Security is shut down. Think
about that. At a time when the threat
of terrorism is real and rising, those on
the other side of the aisle have left the
agency responsible for protecting our
homeland just hanging out to dry for
nearly a month.
Americans should not be alarmed,
but they should take note of who
prioritizes Americans’ safety. DHS secures our border. DHS works to stop
terrorist threats. DHS supports the law
enforcement officers who keep our
communities safe.
Letting it stay shut down is reckless.
Stop the partisan games and protect
Americans.
Mr. Speaker, this issue is personal
for me. I am a lieutenant colonel in the
Air National Guard. I still currently
serve. Should I be called up, my go-bag
is packed and ready.
Serving as a medical crew director in
the back of an aircraft in hostile environments, I have looked wounded servicemembers in their eyes as I cared for
them. As a psychiatric mental health
nurse practitioner, I have seen these
warriors return home with tremendous
weight and trauma on their minds and
in their hearts and the weight of the
world on their shoulders.
When we talk about supporting and
praying for our troops, this isn’t theoretical for me. I have lived it. Quite
honestly, it is why I am here in Congress. Our men and women in uniform
deserve a Congress that has their
backs.
Mr. Speaker, when some of those on
the other side second-guess and even go
as far as telling our military to disregard their orders, that is not leadership.
Under President Trump’s leadership,
America dealt a decisive blow. For
nearly 50 years, the Iranian regime
fueled terrorism. It backed proxy militias and threatened Americans and our
allies. Their chants of ‘‘death to America’’ have never been symbolic. They
have been backed by violence and a relentless pursuit of nuclear weapons.
President Trump made it clear that
Iran would never obtain a nuclear
weapon. He gave their leaders a chance
to negotiate. They chose deception.
They chose delay.
When diplomacy failed, the President
acted to protect the American people.
That sends a message far beyond
Tehran. Russia is watching. China is
watching. Every adversary testing
Americans’ resolve is watching.
There is peace through strength. It
protects American lives, and it keeps
our country safe.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I ask unanimous consent to
include in the RECORD this MSN article
titled: ‘‘Kash Patel’s latest firings
ousted agents with expertise in Iran.’’
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Mr.
Speaker, is there objection to the re-

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

quest of the gentlewoman from New
Mexico?
There was no objection.
[From MS NOW, March 2, 2026]
KASH PATEL’S LATEST FIRINGS OUSTED
AGENTS WITH EXPERTISE IN IRAN
(By Carol Leonnig)
When FBI Director Kash Patel fired a
dozen FBI agents and staff last week for
their role in the classified documents investigation of Donald Trump, he targeted an
elite counter espionage unit that investigates threats from foreign adversaries and
specializes in Iran, according to more than a
half dozen sources with knowledge of the
firings.
The firings came as Patel claimed—without evidence—that the team of FBI agents
who investigated Trump’s hoarding of top-secret records at his Mar-a-Lago club had engaged in improper investigative steps.
But his gutting of the global espionage
unit, known as CI–12, also came days before
Trump launched Operation Epic Fury, a series of bombing strikes on Iran that killed
the country’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei.
A previous bombing strike on Iran ordered
by Trump in his first presidency was followed by a series of Iranian operations on
U.S. soil to try to assassinate Trump and
some of his aides.
CI–12 conducts investigations of illegal
media leaks and mishandling of classified
documents, but also has veteran agents
trained on threats and spy operations with a
special focus on the Middle East, including
Iran and its proxies, but also Cuba and some
terror organizations. It does not investigate
threats from China or Russia, which are handled by separate units.
This global espionage team helped uncover
numerous counterintelligence threats from
foreign governments, including Monica Witt,
a former U.S. Air Force intelligence specialist and sergeant who began spying for
Iran. While working with highly classified
U.S. intelligence, prosecutors said, Witt converted to Islam and began spying to aid Iran.
She was indicted by a grand jury in 2019 but
had defected to Iran and remains a fugitive.
The targeting of the CI–12 unit in last
week’s firings was first reported by The New
York Sun.
On Monday, people inside the FBI were
bracing for the possibility that Patel would
fire more agents and staff on CI–12.
FBI spokesperson Ben Williamson told MS
NOW that the FBI does not comment on personnel matters but maintains a ‘‘robust
counterintelligence operation, with personnel all over the country, who delivered
record results in 2025, including a 35 percent
increase in counterintelligence arrests, six of
the Ten Most Wanted Fugitives captured,
and multiple foiled terrorism plots just in
December alone.’’
He added, ‘‘Our teams remain fully engaged across the country and prepared to
mobilize any security assets needed to assist
federal partners—as well as state and local
law enforcement.’’

Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself such time as I
may consume.
Mr. Speaker, we also know the
Trump administration, in addition to
getting rid of those with expertise in
Iran, also appointed a 22-year-old to
head DHS’ counterterrorism office.
When we talk about making America
less safe, it is the Trump administration that is making America less safe.
It is the Trump administration, by
going to war in Iran after promising he

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.029

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

would not do that, that is making
America less safe.
We can also talk about how he is also
betraying not just his promise of no
foreign intervention and wars, but he is
betraying his promise to lower costs
because now we are seeing gas prices
surge. Americans know this.
It is this administration. It is the
Trump administration that is making
their gas prices go up. It is his tariffs
that are making their gas prices go up.
He is costing Americans money, and he
is making their world less safe.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
b 1320
Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Utah
(Mr. KENNEDY), a member of our freshman class who traveled earlier this
year to Central America to review the
threats to our national security that
these transnational gangs posed.
Mr. KENNEDY of Utah. Mr. Speaker,
I thank my friend, the gentleman from
Georgia (Mr. JACK), for the privilege of
being able to speak on this really important topic today.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the
rule to put a stop to yet another Democrat/Schumer shutdown and fund the
Department of Homeland Security at
this critical time. We all know and
Democrats know that shutdowns are
bad for the American people. That has
been true regardless of which party has
caused them.
Democrats have now shut down the
government twice in the span of 4
months, holding the American people’s
safety hostage to their policy demands.
We have just heard Democrats admit
responsibility for this nonsensical
shutdown on this floor today. House
Republicans negotiated in good faith
with House and Senate Democrats and
produced a clean, bipartisan funding
bill for all of the Departments. That is
how this process is supposed to work.
ICE is already funded and operational, exposing the Schumer shutdown as a political stunt more than
anything else. What has actually been
left without funding is the Coast
Guard, TSA, and FEMA, the agencies
that keep us safe when disaster strikes.
The agencies on the front lines of
American safety are now in limbo over
a political standoff that never should
have happened.
Even more troubling is the fact that
the agency tasked with keeping Americans safe from terrorism is defunded
when we face terrorist threats from
Iran.
Mr. Speaker, I say to my Democratic
friends and colleagues: Stop the games.
End the shutdown.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I yield myself the balance of
my time.
Mr. Speaker, I ask for unanimous
consent to include in the RECORD the
February 2026 PBS News article titled:
‘‘Poll: Nearly two-thirds of Americans
say ICE has gone too far in immigration crackdown.’’

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

H2387

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentlewoman from New Mexico?
There was no objection.
[From PBS News, Feb. 5, 2026]
POLL: NEARLY TWO-THIRDS OF AMERICANS
SAY ICE HAS GONE TOO FAR IN IMMIGRATION
CRACKDOWN
Americans largely disapprove of the actions of Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents as recent enhanced enforcement
operations spread to new cities across the
country, a new PBS News/NPR/Marist Poll
found. A majority say ICE is making Americans less safe, and a growing number believe
the agency’s actions have gone too far.
Meanwhile, anti-ICE protests that have
grown in size and visibility in recent weeks
are viewed by a majority of Americans as
mostly legitimate and not unlawful.
Six in 10 Americans disapprove of the job
ICE is doing, while about 3 in 10 approve.
Opinions about the agency and its actions
are sharply divided along political lines,
with 91 percent of Democrats and 66 percent
of independents registering their disapproval. Republicans, however, remain supportive, with 73 percent approving of the
agency’s work.
The situation has put President Donald
Trump in an ‘‘untenable position,’’ said Lee
Miringoff, director of the Marist Institute
for Public Opinion.
Pictures and videos of armed and masked
immigration agents detaining people, including U.S. citizens, on the streets of American
cities have flooded social media in recent
weeks. As Americans see those recent arrests, as well as shootings, from multiple angles, the ‘‘bad imagery’’ has led to a dramatic shift in support.
‘‘Questions rise in people’s minds as to
whether this is a good policy,’’ Miringoff
said. Nearly two-thirds of respondents in the
latest poll—65 percent—feel ICE has gone too
far in enforcing immigration laws, a jump
from 54 percent last June, when the Trump
administration began enhanced enforcement
efforts in Los Angeles. That’s driven largely
by Democrats and independents, but a growing share of Republicans say the same.
Another 22 percent of respondents say the
agency’s actions are about right, compared
to 26 percent last year. The percentage that
believes ICE is not going far enough in its efforts dropped from 18 percent to 12 percent
today.
The latest poll was conducted in the days
that followed the killing of Alex Pretti by
Customs and Border Protection agents in
Minneapolis, the second fatal shooting of an
American citizen by federal immigration officials in the city this year.
Pretti’s death—and public outcry over the
aggressive tactics of agents—sparked a
shakeup in the administration’s immigration efforts. Border Patrol commander Greg
Bovino, who had overseen the crackdown in
Minneapolis and other cities, was removed
from his post and replaced with White House
border czar Tom Homan, whom Trump personally dispatched to be the public face of
the operation.
Homan said Wednesday that because of
‘‘unprecedented collaboration’’ between local
authorities and ICE, 700 federal immigration
agents would leave Minnesota immediately,
leaving about 2,000 personnel behind for now.
In one of the more notable shifts in recent
days. ICE agents have been able to take custody of undocumented immigrants directly
from local jails before they are released,
which Homan called ‘‘smart law enforcement’’ that requires fewer officers to be deployed on the city’s streets.
Trump’s tone about immigration also
shifted again this week. He said in a Wednes-

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

day interview with NBC News that the federal response could use a ‘‘bit of a softer
touch’’ while still remaining ‘‘tough.’’
‘‘The White House has blinked on Minneapolis,’’ Miringoff said about the recent
changes in leadership and scope of the operation. ‘‘They need to change the narrative.’’
While the Department of Homeland Security insists agents are focused on removing
the ‘‘worst of the worst’’ undocumented immigrants with criminal records, high-profile
cases, including the detention of 5–year-old
Liam Conejo Ramos of Minneapolis, have
drawn new attention and renewed scrutiny
on the tactics used to enforce immigration
laws and who the Federal government is removing.
A majority of Americans—62 percent—believe ICE’s actions are making Americans
less safe. Another 37 percent including 77
percent of Republicans, say America is more
safe.
WHAT REPUBLICANS ARE SAYING ABOUT
IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT UNDER TRUMP

The recent scenes from Minneapolis, including the shootings of Pretti and Renee
Good, have caused some people who voted for
Trump to rethink their support.
Oscar Gomez, 34, who has lived in California his entire life, is a three-time Trump
voter who has supported the president since
he first ran in 2016. Gomez said he now regrets his vote and no longer supports the
president’s actions.
‘‘It’s kind of sad how, even as a U.S. citizen, you can still fear for your life,’’ he said.
Gomez said that he supported the president’s 2024 campaign promise to prioritize
deporting immigrants with criminal records.
But instead, Gomez said, the Trump administration is trying to remove ‘‘anyone who
they see as brown.’’
‘‘He’s not after criminals anymore. He’s dividing families at this point,’’ Gomez said.
‘‘He’s focused on the wrong issues.’’
Other Trump voters said the administration should be going further in its enforcement efforts.
Jessica Osuna, 63, moved to Texas from
New Mexico with her family two years ago.
She, too, voted for Trump in 2016, 2020 and
2024 and echoes the president’s unsubstantiated claims that undocumented immigrants are more likely to commit crimes
than U.S. citizens.
‘‘They shouldn’t even be here,’’ she said of
people who entered the country illegally.
‘‘They’re breaking a law. They didn’t do it
the right way.’’
After the recent fatal shootings and other
incidents in Minneapolis, Homeland Security
Secretary Kristi Noem announced Monday
that all immigration agents in the city will
wear body cameras during operations, with
the policy likely expanding to other cities.
Lawmakers are engaged in a heated debate
over potential reforms that Democrats and
some Republicans would like to see to ICE
and DHS. ICE’s policies and tactics held up a
recent government funding bill, resulting in
a short-term partial shutdown. Though a
deal was eventually struck to fund most of
the government, DHS funding is set to expire
again at the end of next week unless Congress can agree on new restrictions.
Democrats are also pushing to require immigration agents to carry identification,
take off the masks many regularly wear and
require judicial warrants for many of their
actions.
In the meantime, tens of thousands of people have protested immigration actions in
Minneapolis and other cities. In this poll, 59
percent of Americans say the protests are
mostly legitimate; another 40 percent believe they are mostly people acting unlawfully.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.031

H04MRPT1

H2388

Like 75 percent of Republicans, Osuna, the
Trump supporter in Texas, believes the protesters have gone too far. The use of whistles
and air horns to disrupt immigration agents
should be illegal, she said.
‘‘It sets something off in your brain, and of
course, then that’s when all the chaos
starts,’’ she said. ‘‘When they say, ‘Stop,’
you need to stop. You need to follow their directions. You need to listen to them. If you
don’t, then, in my opinion, they have a right
to protect themselves.’’
WHY TRUMP’S ‘POLICIES ARE A DRAG ON HIM
RIGHT NOW’—AND WHAT THAT MIGHT MEAN
FOR MIDTERMS

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Overall,the president’s approval rating has
held steady, even as the administration’s immigration enforcement tactics have dominated public attention. The percentage of
Americans who approve of the job he is doing
is nearly identical to that of the month before 39 percent compared to 38 percent in
January). Another 56 percent disapprove of
his job performance.
Strikingly, 51 percent say they strongly
disapprove. That’s the highest share who
have said that since Trump reentered the
Oval Office last year. It’s a level of disapproval matched in Marist polling only in
the days after a mob of his supporters
stormed the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021.
Trump’s support among Republicans remains high, at 85 percent, but his support
among Black, Latino and young voters—all
groups that moved his direction in the 2024
election—has continued to diminish.
‘‘It’s a difference between him and his policies. And he doesn’t change,’’ Miringoff said.
‘‘He’s still the Donald Trump that people
loved and hated. But the policies are a drag
on him right now.’’
By a 2-to-1 margin, more Americans say
they would like Trump to spend more time
prioritizing the economy and lowering the
prices of goods than want him to prioritize
controlling immigration.
The percentage of Americans who disapprove of Trump’s handling of the economy
has slowly ticked up in his second term.
Now, nearly 6 in 10 respondents disapprove—
the highest of either of his terms in office
and a higher level of disapproval than his
predecessor Joe Biden measured at any point
during his presidency.
Tariffs on various imported goods, which
the Trump administration has levied and
waived regularly, are one of the tent-pole
issues of his second-term economic policy.
More than half of Americans say tariffs
mostly hurt the U.S. economy, a number
that has jumped 8 percentage points since
last March. Another 31 percent say tariffs
are mostly helpful.
If his administration’s policies remain on
the same path over the next several months,
frustrations among voters are likely to have
a negative impact on Republican candidates
in November’s midterm elections, Miringoff
warns.
‘‘It can make some swing-state and swingdistrict Republicans have to scurry for
cover,’’ he said. And as a result many could
be seeking to put’’ a little distance between
themselves and Trump.’’

Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, we just heard from another
Republican saying that ICE is already
fully funded. So what they should do is
take up the Democratic proposal to
fund the other agencies. They have acknowledged it over and over again
today.
All that we need to do to fund the
TSA, Coast Guard, and FEMA is to
take up our proposal. They are refusing
to do so. When they refuse to do so,

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:19 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

they are causing the shutdown because
I must say it again: What Democrats
are asking is simply that ICE follow
the Constitution.
Not only are Republicans inflicting
harm on FEMA, TSA, and others, but
they are refusing to follow the Constitution. They are refusing to have
their law enforcement comply with law
enforcement everywhere.
That is why Democrats are saying
‘‘no.’’ We are with Americans when we
say that this terror that ICE has inflicted on Americans has to stop.
We are also saying that Congress
should do its job and step in and say
that we insist that they not violate our
Constitution. We should step in and do
our job of saying that we insist that
Congress discuss and decide whether we
should enter into a costly war in the
Middle East, which is what they are allowing to go forward.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
reject this bill, vote against the rule,
and vote for the Democratic proposal
to fund FEMA and the Coast Guard.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time.
Mr. Speaker, in closing, the rule I
have presented today allows the House
of Representatives to carry out its responsibilities and to govern in an orderly and responsible manner for the
American people.
As a reminder, a ‘‘yes’’ vote on this
rule enables us to consider legislation
that will fully end the Democratic
shutdown of the Department of Homeland Security and allows us in this
body to restore funding for the agencies responsible for protecting the
American people.
A ‘‘yes’’ vote on this rule ensures
that the men and women serving on
the front lines of our homeland security, from coastguardsmen and TSA officers to cyber defenders, law enforcement personnel, and emergency responders, have the resources and support that they need to carry out their
critical missions.
A ‘‘yes’’ vote on this rule strengthens
the security of the American homeland
by restoring funding for the agencies
responsible for counterterrorism, cybersecurity, aviation security, disaster
response, and maritime security, at a
time when threats to our country are
increasing.
As I made clear earlier, a ‘‘yes’’ vote
on this rule ensures that the rest of the
Department of Homeland Security can
continue its vital work, even as ICE
and CBP have already been funded
through H.R. 1, the One Big Beautiful
Bill Act.
Finally, a ‘‘yes’’ vote on this rule allows the House to fulfill its most basic
responsibility to govern and to ensure
the safety of the American people is
never used as a political bargaining
chip.
Mr. Speaker, the consequences of
leaving the Department of Homeland
Security unfunded are too serious to

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

ignore. This rule allows the House to
act to restore full funding and to ensure that the agencies tasked with protecting the American people can carry
out their missions without further disruption.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘yes’’ on the rule.
The material previously referred to
by Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ is as follows:
AN AMENDMENT TO H. RES. 1095 OFFERED BY
MS. LEGER FERNANDEZ OF NEW MEXICO
Strike all after the resolving clause and insert the following:
That immediately upon adoption of this
resolution, the House shall proceed to the
consideration in the House of the bill (H.R.
7744) making appropriations for the Department of Homeland Security for the fiscal
year ending September 30, 2026, and for other
purposes. All points of order against consideration of the bill are waived. An amendment in the nature of a substitute consisting
of the text of H.R. 7481, as introduced, shall
be considered as adopted. The bill, as amended, shall be considered as read. All points of
order against provisions in the bill, as
amended, are waived. The previous question
shall be considered as ordered on the bill, as
amended, and on any further amendment
thereto, to final passage without intervening
motion except: (1) one hour of debate equally
divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on
Appropriations or their respective designees;
and (2) one motion to recommit.
SEC. 2. Clause 1(c) of rule XIX and clause 8
of rule XX shall not apply to the consideration of H.R. 7744.
SEC. 3. The Clerk shall transmit to the
Senate a message that the House has passed
H.R. 7744 no later than three calendar days
after passage.

Mr. JACK. Mr. Speaker, I yield back
the balance of my time, and I move the
previous question on the resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on ordering the previous
question.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, on that I demand the yeas
and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 9 of rule XX, this 15minute vote on ordering the previous
question will be followed by 5-minute
votes on:
Adoption of the resolution, if ordered; and
Motions to suspend the rules and
pass:
S. 723; and
H.R. 6472.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 213, nays
208, not voting 11, as follows:
[Roll No. 79]
YEAS—213
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr
Barrett

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.018

H04MRPT1

Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert

Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan
Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)

March 4, 2026
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)

Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy

Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menefee
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone

Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto

Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—11
Baird
Bonamici
Costa
Crenshaw

Cuellar
Garcia (TX)
Gonzalez, V.
Hunt

Jackson (IL)
Nehls
Valadao

b 1359
Messrs. SUOZZI and JOHNSON of
Georgia changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’
to ‘‘nay.’’
Mr. CLINE changed his vote from
‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’
So the previous question was ordered.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MCDOWELL). The question is on the resolution.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
RECORDED VOTE

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

NAYS—208
Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa

VerDate Sep 11 2014

Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Goodlander

05:41 Mar 05, 2026

H2389

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Turner (OH)
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren

Jkt 069060

Ms.
LEGER
FERNANDEZ.
Mr.
Speaker, I demand a recorded vote.
A recorded vote was ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—ayes 211, noes 209,
not voting 12, as follows:
[Roll No. 80]
AYES—211
Aderholt
Alford
Allen
Amodei (NV)
Arrington
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Barr
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Begich
Bentz
Bergman
Bice
Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Boebert
Bost
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Buchanan

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Burchett
Burlison
Calvert
Cammack
Carey
Carter (GA)
Carter (TX)
Ciscomani
Cline
Cloud
Clyde
Cole
Collins
Comer
Crane
Crank
Crawford
Davidson
De La Cruz
DesJarlais
Diaz-Balart
Donalds
Downing
Dunn (FL)

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Edwards
Ellzey
Emmer
Estes
Evans (CO)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Fine
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foxx
Franklin, Scott
Fry
Fulcher
Garbarino
Gill (TX)
Gimenez
Goldman (TX)

Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Hinson
Houchin
Hudson
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Jack
Jackson (TX)
James
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kean
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Langworthy
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)

Letlow
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Mace
Mackenzie
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Massie
Mast
McCaul
McClain
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Mills
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Murphy
Newhouse
Norman
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Owens
Palmer
Patronis
Perry
Pfluger
Reschenthaler
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose

Adams
Aguilar
Amo
Ansari
Auchincloss
Balint
Barragán
Beatty
Bell
Bera
Beyer
Bishop
Boyle (PA)
Brown
Brownley
Budzinski
Bynum
Carbajal
Carson
Carter (LA)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Clyburn
Cohen
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crockett
Crow
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier

Dexter
Dingell
Doggett
Elfreth
Escobar
Espaillat
Evans (PA)
Fields
Figures
Fletcher
Foster
Foushee
Frankel, Lois
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Gillen
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Gomez
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Harder (CA)
Hayes
Himes
Horsford
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Huffman
Ivey
Jacobs
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (TX)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kennedy (NY)
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Landsman
Larsen (WA)

Rouzer
Roy
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Scalise
Schmidt
Schweikert
Scott, Austin
Self
Sessions
Shreve
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Spartz
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Steube
Strong
Stutzman
Taylor
Tenney
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Turner (OH)
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden
Wagner
Walberg
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Wied
Williams (TX)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NOES—209

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.020

H04MRPT1

Larson (CT)
Latimer
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Lynch
Magaziner
Mannion
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menefee
Menendez
Meng
Mfume
Min
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Norcross
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Pallone
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pingree

H2390
Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Ross
Ruiz
Ryan
Salinas
Sánchez
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Scott (VA)
Scott, David

Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Underwood
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)

NOT VOTING—12
Baird
Bonamici
Crenshaw
Cuellar

Feenstra
Garcia (TX)
Gonzalez, V.
Hunt

Jackson (IL)
Nehls
Timmons
Valadao

b 1406
So the resolution was agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

TRIBAL TRUST LAND
HOMEOWNERSHIP ACT OF 2025
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on the motion to suspend the rules and pass the
bill (S. 723) to require the Bureau of Indian Affairs to process and complete
all mortgage packages associated with
residential and business mortgages on
Indian land by certain deadlines, and
for other purposes, on which the yeas
and nays were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Arkansas (Mr.
WESTERMAN) that the House suspend
the rules and pass the bill.
This is a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 384, nays 40,
not voting 8, as follows:

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

[Roll No. 81]
YEAS—384
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Allen
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Arrington
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Balint
Barr
Barragán
Barrett
Baumgartner
Bean (FL)
Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Beyer
Bice
Bilirakis

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Sewell
Sherman
Simon
Smith (WA)
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stevens
Strickland
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda

Bishop
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Burchett
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)

Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Collins
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crank
Crawford
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davidson
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio

05:41 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Escobar
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Gooden
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Grijalva
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huffman
Huizenga
Hunt
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Kennedy (UT)

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Knott
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Lynch
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Massie
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McCaul
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McClintock
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGarvey
McGovern
McGuire
McIver
Meeks
Menefee
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (OH)
Miller-Meeks
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Murphy
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Nehls
Newhouse
Norcross
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pfluger
Pingree

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Pocan
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross
Rouzer
Ruiz
Rulli
Rutherford
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schmidt
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simon
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Steil
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Wagner
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)

Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)

Wittman
Womack

Biggs (AZ)
Biggs (SC)
Boebert
Brecheen
Burlison
Cammack
Cloud
Clyde
Crane
Donalds
Fallon
Fine
Fletcher
Fry

Gill (TX)
Gosar
Griffith
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Higgins (LA)
Jackson (TX)
Mace
Miller (IL)
Miller (WV)
Mills

Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—40
Moore (WV)
Norman
Ogles
Onder
Patronis
Perry
Roy
Self
Spartz
Steube
Timmons
Van Orden

NOT VOTING—8
Baird
Bonamici
Crenshaw

Garcia (TX)
Gonzalez, V.
Jackson (IL)

Smith (WA)
Valadao

b 1413
Mrs. CAMMACK changed her vote
from ‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’
So (two-thirds being in the affirmative) the rules were suspended and the
bill was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

TERRITORIAL STUDENT ACCESS
TO HIGHER EDUCATION ACT
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, the unfinished business is the vote on the motion to suspend the rules and pass the
bill (H.R. 6472) to amend the Higher
Education Act of 1965 to provide for instate tuition rates for certain residents
of Guam, the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands, American
Samoa, and the United States Virgin
Islands, and for other purposes, as
amended, on which the yeas and nays
were ordered.
The Clerk read the title of the bill.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Michigan (Mr.
WALBERG) that the House suspend the
rules and pass the bill, as amended.
This is a 5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 351, nays 72,
not voting 9, as follows:
[Roll No. 82]
YEAS—351
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Allen
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Balint
Barr
Barragán
Baumgartner
Beatty
Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Bergman
Beyer
Bilirakis
Bishop

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.012

H04MRPT1

Bost
Boyle (PA)
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Burchett
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu

Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Clyburn
Cohen
Cole
Comer
Conaway
Correa
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crawford
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davis (IL)
Davis (NC)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Downing
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Escobar
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzpatrick
Fleischmann
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Gillen
Gimenez
Golden (ME)
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gomez
Gonzales, Tony
Goodlander
Gottheimer
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grijalva
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Harris (NC)
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huffman
Huizenga
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jacobs
James
Jayapal
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Kean
Keating
Kelly (IL)

Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Kennedy (UT)
Khanna
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Krishnamoorthi
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Langworthy
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luna
Luttrell
Lynch
Mackenzie
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McBride
McCaul
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McDonald Rivet
McGarvey
McGovern
McIver
Meeks
Menefee
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Mfume
Miller (IL)
Miller (OH)
Miller-Meeks
Min
Moolenaar
Moore (NC)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mrvan
Mullin
Murphy
Nadler
Neal
Neguse
Nehls
Newhouse
Norcross
Nunn (IA)
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Pelosi
Perez
Peters
Pettersen
Pfluger
Pingree
Pocan

Alford
Arrington
Barrett

Bean (FL)
Bice
Biggs (AZ)

NAYS—72

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:41 Mar 05, 2026

H2391

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Riley (NY)
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross
Rouzer
Ruiz
Rulli
Rutherford
Ryan
Salazar
Salinas
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Schrier
Schweikert
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simon
Simpson
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Sorensen
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Stefanik
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Swalwell
Sykes
Takano
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Titus
Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Tran
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Van Epps
Van Orden
Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Vindman
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)
Westerman
Whitesides
Williams (GA)
Wilson (FL)
Wilson (SC)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

Biggs (SC)
Boebert
Brecheen

Jkt 069060

Burlison
Cammack
Cloud
Clyde
Collins
Crane
Crank
Davidson
Donalds
Fallon
Fine
Fitzgerald
Fletcher
Fry
Fulcher
Gill (TX)
Gooden
Gosar
Graves
Hageman
Haridopolos

Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harshbarger
Higgins (LA)
Hunt
Jackson (TX)
Knott
Lee (FL)
Letlow
Mace
Massie
McClintock
McCormick
McDowell
McGuire
Miller (WV)
Mills
Moore (AL)
Moore (WV)
Moran
Norman

Obernolte
Ogles
Onder
Patronis
Perry
Roy
Schmidt
Self
Smith (MO)
Spartz
Steil
Steube
Stutzman
Tiffany
Timmons
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Wagner
Webster (FL)
Wied
Williams (TX)

NOT VOTING—9
Baird
Bonamici
Crenshaw

Garcia (TX)
Gonzalez, V.
Jackson (IL)

Jordan
Smith (WA)
Valadao

b 1420
So (two-thirds being in the affirmative) the rules were suspended and the
bill, as amended, was passed.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
f

RAISING A QUESTION OF THE
PRIVILEGES OF THE HOUSE
Ms. MACE. Mr. Speaker, I rise to a
question of the privileges of the House
and offer the resolution that was previously noticed.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
Clerk will report the resolution.
The Clerk read as follows:
H. RES. lll
Directing the Committee on Ethics to preserve and publicly release records of the
Committee’s review of violations or alleged
violations of clause 9 (as it pertains to acts
of sexual harassment) and clause 18 of rule
XXIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives. Whereas there is no place for sexual
harassment or unwelcome sexual advances in
the House of Representatives;
Whereas clause 9 of rule XXIII of the Rules
of the House provides ‘‘Member, Delegate,
Resident Commissioner, officer, or employee
of the House may not discharge and may not
refuse to hire an individual, or otherwise discriminate against an individual with respect
to compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of the race,
color, religion, sex (including marital or parental status), sexual orientation, gender
identity, disability, age, or national origin of
such individual, including by committing an
act of sexual harassment against such individual’’;
Whereas clause 18(a) of Rule XXIII of the
Rules of the House provides ‘‘A Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner may not
engage in a sexual relationship with any employee of the House who works under the supervision of the Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner, or who is an employee of
a committee on which the Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner serves’’;
Whereas clause 18(b) of Rule XXIII of the
Rules of the House provides ‘‘A Member, Delegate, Resident Commissioner, officer, or
employee of the House may not engage in
unwelcome sexual advances or conduct towards another Member, Delegate, Resident
Commissioner, officer, or employee of the
House’’; Whereas sexual harassment and unwelcome sexual advances by Members, Dele-

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

gates, or Resident Commissioners, in violation of clause 9 and clause 18 of rule XXIII of
the Rules of the House, affect the safety, dignity, and the integrity of the proceedings of
the House of Representatives: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Committee on Ethics
shall—
(1) preserve all documents and investigative materials related to any violations or
alleged violations of clause 9 (as it pertains
to acts of sexual harassment), clause 18, or
any other clause (to the extent an act of sexual harassment, unwelcome sexual advance,
or sexual assault constituted a violation or
alleged violation of such clause) of rule
XXIII of the Rules of the House by a Member, Delegate, or Resident Commissioner;
and
(2) not later than 60 days after the date of
the adoption of this resolution, make publicly available all final reports, or in such
cases where there is not a final report, the
most recent draft report, conclusions, recommendations, exhibits, and attached or accompanying materials, with the personally
identifiable information of victims, alleged
victims, and witnesses redacted, related to
the Committee’s investigations into violations or alleged violations of clause 9 (as it
pertains to acts of sexual harassment),
clause 18, or any other clause (to the extent
an act of sexual harassment, unwelcome sexual advance, or sexual assault constituted a
violation or alleged violation of such clause)
of rule XXIII by a Member, Delegate, or
Resident Commissioner.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The resolution qualifies.
MOTION TO REFER

Mr. GARBARINO. Mr. Speaker, I
have a motion at the desk to refer the
resolution to the Committee on Ethics.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
clerk will report the motion to refer.
The Clerk read as follows:
Mr. Garbarino of New York moves to refer
the resolution to the Committee on Ethics.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from New York is recognized
for 1 hour.
Mr. GARBARINO. Mr. Speaker, I rise
in support of my motion.
I yield back the balance of my time,
and I move the previous question on
the motion to refer.
The previous question was ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion to refer.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the ayes appeared to have it.
Ms. MACE. Mr. Speaker, on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. This is a
5-minute vote.
The vote was taken by electronic device, and there were—yeas 357, nays 65,
answered ‘‘present’’ 1, not voting 9, as
follows:
[Roll No. 83]
YEAS—357
Adams
Aderholt
Aguilar
Alford
Allen
Amo
Amodei (NV)
Ansari
Arrington

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.014

H04MRPT1

Auchincloss
Babin
Bacon
Balderson
Balint
Barr
Barragán
Baumgartner
Beatty

Begich
Bell
Bentz
Bera
Beyer
Bice
Biggs (SC)
Bilirakis
Bishop

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2392
Bost
Boyle (PA)
Brecheen
Bresnahan
Brown
Brownley
Buchanan
Budzinski
Bynum
Calvert
Carbajal
Carey
Carson
Carter (GA)
Carter (LA)
Carter (TX)
Casar
Case
Casten
Castor (FL)
Castro (TX)
CherfilusMcCormick
Chu
Ciscomani
Cisneros
Clark (MA)
Clarke (NY)
Cleaver
Cline
Cloud
Clyburn
Clyde
Cohen
Cole
Collins
Conaway
Costa
Courtney
Craig
Crank
Crockett
Crow
Cuellar
Davids (KS)
Davidson
Davis (IL)
De La Cruz
Dean (PA)
DeGette
DeLauro
DelBene
Deluzio
DeSaulnier
DesJarlais
Dexter
Diaz-Balart
Dingell
Doggett
Dunn (FL)
Edwards
Elfreth
Ellzey
Emmer
Espaillat
Estes
Evans (CO)
Evans (PA)
Ezell
Fallon
Fedorchak
Feenstra
Fields
Figures
Finstad
Fischbach
Fitzgerald
Fleischmann
Fletcher
Flood
Fong
Foster
Foushee
Foxx
Frankel, Lois
Franklin, Scott
Friedman
Frost
Fry
Fulcher
Garamendi
Garbarino
Garcia (CA)
Garcı́a (IL)
Gillen
Gimenez
Goldman (NY)
Goldman (TX)
Gonzales, Tony

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE
Gooden
Goodlander
Gosar
Gottheimer
Graves
Gray
Green, Al (TX)
Griffith
Grothman
Guest
Guthrie
Hageman
Hamadeh (AZ)
Harder (CA)
Haridopolos
Harrigan
Harris (MD)
Harris (NC)
Harshbarger
Hayes
Hern (OK)
Higgins (LA)
Hill (AR)
Himes
Hinson
Horsford
Houchin
Houlahan
Hoyer
Hoyle (OR)
Hudson
Huffman
Huizenga
Hunt
Hurd (CO)
Issa
Ivey
Jack
Jackson (TX)
Jacobs
Jeffries
Johnson (GA)
Johnson (LA)
Johnson (SD)
Johnson (TX)
Jordan
Joyce (OH)
Joyce (PA)
Kamlager-Dove
Kaptur
Keating
Kelly (IL)
Kelly (MS)
Kelly (PA)
Kennedy (NY)
Kennedy (UT)
Kiggans (VA)
Kiley (CA)
Kim
Kustoff
LaHood
LaLota
Landsman
Larsen (WA)
Larson (CT)
Latimer
Latta
Lawler
Lee (FL)
Lee (NV)
Lee (PA)
Leger Fernandez
Letlow
Levin
Liccardo
Lieu
Lofgren
Loudermilk
Lucas
Luttrell
Lynch
Magaziner
Malliotakis
Maloy
Mann
Mannion
Mast
Matsui
McBath
McCaul
McClain
McClain Delaney
McClellan
McCollum
McCormick
McDonald Rivet
McDowell
McGarvey
McIver

05:45 Mar 05, 2026

Meeks
Menefee
Menendez
Meng
Messmer
Meuser
Miller (IL)
Miller (WV)
Miller-Meeks
Moolenaar
Moore (AL)
Moore (UT)
Moore (WI)
Moran
Morelle
Morrison
Moskowitz
Moulton
Mullin
Murphy
Nadler
Neal
Nehls
Newhouse
Norcross
Nunn (IA)
Obernolte
Ocasio-Cortez
Olszewski
Omar
Owens
Pallone
Palmer
Panetta
Pappas
Patronis
Pelosi
Peters
Pfluger
Pingree
Pou
Pressley
Quigley
Ramirez
Randall
Raskin
Reschenthaler
Rivas
Rogers (AL)
Rogers (KY)
Rose
Ross
Rouzer
Ruiz
Rulli
Rutherford
Salazar
Sánchez
Scalise
Scanlon
Schakowsky
Schneider
Scholten
Scott (VA)
Scott, Austin
Scott, David
Self
Sessions
Sewell
Sherman
Shreve
Simon
Simpson
Smith (MO)
Smith (NE)
Smith (NJ)
Smucker
Soto
Stansbury
Stanton
Stauber
Steil
Steube
Stevens
Strickland
Strong
Stutzman
Subramanyam
Suozzi
Sykes
Taylor
Tenney
Thanedar
Thompson (CA)
Thompson (MS)
Thompson (PA)
Tiffany
Timmons
Titus

Jkt 069060

Tlaib
Tokuda
Tonko
Torres (CA)
Torres (NY)
Trahan
Turner (OH)
Underwood
Van Drew
Van Duyne
Van Epps
Van Orden

Vargas
Vasquez
Veasey
Velázquez
Wagner
Walberg
Walkinshaw
Wasserman
Schultz
Waters
Watson Coleman
Weber (TX)

Barrett
Bean (FL)
Bergman
Biggs (AZ)
Boebert
Burchett
Burlison
Cammack
Comer
Correa
Crane
Crawford
Davis (NC)
Donalds
Downing
Escobar
Fine
Fitzpatrick
Gill (TX)
Golden (ME)
Gomez
Grijalva

James
Jayapal
Kean
Khanna
Krishnamoorthi
Langworthy
Luna
Mace
Mackenzie
Massie
McBride
McClintock
McGovern
McGuire
Mfume
Miller (OH)
Mills
Min
Moore (NC)
Moore (WV)
Mrvan
Neguse

Webster (FL)
Westerman
Whitesides
Wied
Williams (GA)
Williams (TX)
Wilson (FL)
Wittman
Womack
Yakym
Zinke

NAYS—65
Norman
Ogles
Perez
Perry
Pettersen
Pocan
Riley (NY)
Roy
Ryan
Salinas
Schmidt
Schrier
Schweikert
Sorensen
Spartz
Stefanik
Swalwell
Takano
Tran
Vindman
Wilson (SC)

ANSWERED ‘‘PRESENT’’—1
Knott

NOT VOTING—9
Baird
Bonamici
Crenshaw

Garcia (TX)
Gonzalez, V.
Jackson (IL)

Onder
Smith (WA)
Valadao

b 1433
Messrs. NEGUSE and DOWNING
changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to
‘‘nay.’’
So the motion to refer was agreed to.
The result of the vote was announced
as above recorded.
A motion to reconsider was laid on
the table.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Ms. GARCIA of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I was
unable to vote during the vote series today.
Had I been able to vote, I would have voted:
NAY on roll call No. 79, ordering the previous
question on H. Res. 1095; NO on roll call No.
80, Passage of H. Res. 1095; YEA on roll call
No. 81, passage of S. 723; YEA on roll call
No. 82, passage of H.R. 6472; and YEA on
roll call No. 83, Motion to Refer H. Res. 1100.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Ms. BONAMICI. Mr. Speaker, I regret to inform you that I was unable to attend today’s
legislative session. Had I been present, I
would have voted: NAY on Roll Call No. 79,
NO on Roll Call No. 80, YEA on Roll Call No.
81, YEA on Roll Call No. 82, and YEA on Roll
Call No. 83.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION

Mr. VALADAO. Mr. Speaker, I was unable
to attend votes today due to a personal family
matter. Had I been present, I would have
voted: YEA on Roll Call No. 79, AYE on Roll
Call No. 80, YEA on Roll Call No. 81, YEA on
Roll Call No. 82, and YEA on Roll Call No. 83.
f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER
PRO TEMPORE
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MCCLINTOCK). Pursuant to clause 8 of
rule XX, the Chair will postpone further proceedings today on the motion

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

to suspend the rules on which a recorded vote or the yeas and nays are
ordered, or if the vote is objected to
under clause 6 of rule XX.
The House will resume proceedings
on postponed question at a later time.
f

REAFFIRMING IRAN REMAINS THE
LARGEST STATE SPONSOR OF
TERRORISM
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I move to
suspend the rules and pass the resolution (H. Res. 1099) reaffirming Iran remains the largest state sponsor of terrorism.
The Clerk read the title of the resolution.
The text of the resolution is as follows:
H. RES. 1099
Whereas the Islamic Republic of Iran remains the world’s largest state sponsor of
terrorism and provides substantial financial
and military support to groups including
Hezbollah, Hamas, and the Houthis;
Whereas the Islamic Republic of Iran poses
a direct and persistent threat to the United
States and is responsible for the deaths of
hundreds of American citizens;
Whereas, according to the Pentagon, Iranian backed proxy militias are responsible
for the deaths of at least 603 United States
servicemembers in Iraq, roughly 1 in every 6
American combat fatalities in Iraq from 2003
through 2011;
Whereas the Iranian regime is responsible
for executing dozens of assassination plots
targeting American citizens and serving government officials on United States soil;
Whereas Tehran continues to harbor a network of senior al-Qaeda leaders, providing
them with sanctuary space to fundraise in
support of its fighters;
Whereas, in January 2024, United States
servicemembers, Sergeant William Jerome
Rivers, Specialist Kennedy Ladon Sanders,
and Specialist Breonna Alexsondria Moffett
were killed in an Iranian backed proxy attack on Tower 22 in Jordan;
Whereas the regime’s refusal to abandon
its nuclear program and related missile and
conventional weapons activities further resulted in the reimposition of 6 United Nations Security Council Resolutions targeting
the Iranian regime in September 2025; and
Whereas, according to the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Rafael Grossi, Iran has amassed a large
stockpile of enriched uranium and continues
to block access to undeclared sites in Iran affiliated with their ‘‘big, ambitious nuclear
program’’: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the House of Representatives declares it is the policy of the United
States that Iran continues to be the largest
state sponsor of terrorism.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from
Florida (Mr. MAST) and the gentleman
from New York (Mr. MEEKS) each will
control 20 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Florida.
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material on the measure.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Florida?

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.016

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

There was no objection.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, this resolution is very
simple. It is reaffirming that Iran remains the largest state sponsor of terrorism.
Why is Iran the largest state sponsor
of terrorism? Why is that something
that is said? Why must we reaffirm
this?
It is because they have spent the last
47 years targeting and attacking the
United States of America every single
chance that they have.
In April of 2025, Houthi terrorists attacked the USS Harry Truman, causing
a U.S. fighter jet to sink into the
ocean.
In June of 2025, Iran-backed militias
attacked at least three U.S. bases in
Syria and two bases in Iraq.
In January of 2024, Iran-backed
Hezbollah terrorists killed three U.S.
servicemembers and wounded more
than 40 more in a drone attack against
tower 22 at a military base in Jordan.
Before that, Iran-backed militias
wounded three U.S. servicemembers in
an attack at Erbil Air Base in Iraq.
Before that, Iran-backed Hamas terrorists killed 46 Americans and kidnapped at least 12 Americans in the October 7 massacre.
Just prior to that, President Biden
unfroze $6 billion of Iranian assets.
That doesn’t make them the largest
state sponsor of terrorism, but I just
thought it is an interesting point to
put into the timeline.
Before that, an Iranian drone attack
killed an American contractor and
wounded five U.S. servicemembers and
another contractor in a drone strike on
a coalition base in Syria.
Before that, an IRGC captain orchestrated the killing of an American citizen in Baghdad.
Before that, an Iranian rocket attack
killed an American citizen in Iraqi
Kurdistan.
Before that, Iran-backed militias
wounded two U.S. servicemembers in a
series of rocket and drone attacks
against U.S. Forces in Iraq and Syria.
Before that, an Iran-backed militia
fired a rocket at coalition forces in
Erbil, Iraq, wounding a U.S. servicemember and four U.S. civilian contractors.
Before that, Iran-backed Hezbollah
terrorists killed an American civilian
contractor and wounded several U.S.
servicemembers in a rocket attack at
K–1 Air Base, Kirkuk, Iraq.
Before that, Iran held 10 U.S. Navy
sailors at gunpoint, on their knees, on
the deck of an Iranian boat.
b 1440
Before that, Iran-backed Hamas terrorists killed an American citizen and
his wife in a drive-by shooting.
Before that, Iran-backed Hamas terrorists killed two American citizens
serving in the IDF.
The list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker,
pages and pages of Iran killing Americans.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:45 Mar 05, 2026

H2393

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying
something that should not be controversial at all in this House. In fact,
it has been the position of this House
throughout. The Iranian regime is a
malign, nefarious, and deadly actor. It
has appointed terrorist groups on militias across the Middle East, slaughtered its own people, quashed dissent,
and threatened Americans and our interests for decades.
Members of both sides of the aisle
know this. Congress has said it many
times before. In fact, during my years
in Congress, this body has passed dozens of resolutions and laws recognizing
Iran as the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism. There is no dispute
there. This is not a dispute.
Let us be honest about what this resolution is. It is not new policy. It is not
new information. It does nothing to
protect a single American, servicemember, or ally. I think it is about politics. Maybe it is a stunt because of
what Members are going to debate
right after this. I don’t think this accomplishes what Chairman MAST or
the Republicans think it does, because
in no way does this have any effect on
the War Powers Resolution debate
later today.
People can agree—and we all do—and
we all know that Iran is bad. People
also should agree that the President
should come to Congress if he wants to
make the case for war. These two
truths are not incompatible.
For decades, Republicans and Democrats have worked together to counter
Iran’s dangerous behavior. Congress
has imposed layer after layer of sanctions, disrupted terrorist financing networks, strengthened regional partnerships, and worked with our allies to
constrain Iran’s nuclear program.
Unfortunately,
President
Donald
Trump has often upended or ignored bipartisan work: for example, when he
pardoned the founder of Binance, an
enabler of the Iran regime that allowed
his company to be used to fund Iran’s
terror proxies.
Past efforts were designed to contain
and deter Iran’s threats while protecting Americans’ interests in avoiding a broader regional war.
Today, Americans find ourselves in a
very different situation. At President
Trump’s own behest, the United States
is now engaged in direct military conflict with Iran, a conflict that was initiated without congressional authorization and without a clear explanation
to the American people for what the
endgame is.
To be clear: No one in this Chamber
doubts the danger posed by the Iranian
regime. Recognizing that threat does
not mean abandoning our Constitution.
It does not mean Congress should surrender its responsibility to debate and
authorize war. It certainly does not
mean we should walk blindly into a

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

conflict with a deadly serious adversary without our own serious or clear
strategy for what comes next.
The stakes here are not symbolic.
They aren’t talking points.
American servicemembers are in
harm’s way. The Middle East is on the
brink of a wider conflict. The consequences of a war with Iran could
shape the region—and American security—for decades.
Instead of debating yet another resolution stating something that we all
already know, this body should be asking some real questions: What are the
objectives of this war? What is the
strategy for preventing regional escalation? What is the plan for the day
after? What will this cost the American
people? The American people deserve
those answers, and Congress deserves a
vote. Our constituents are waiting to
hear.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
I thank my colleague across the aisle
for the agreement that we have on this.
To quote my colleague just now: There
is no dispute that Iran remains the
largest state sponsor of terror.
He may not expect me to agree on
this, but I would also agree with him
on this point: There is absolutely nothing that this resolution is going to do
to protect any American or any American servicemember, nor any previous
piece of paper, strongly worded letter,
or anything else that this body has
done that has been successful in protecting America from the largest state
sponsor of terror. It is only two actions: number one, President Trump
putting Qasem Soleimani into about
five separate pieces on the side of an
Iraqi tarmac; and, number two, the actions that President Trump has taken
in this operation to destroy every single piece of Iranian military hardware
that can reach out and touch an American or has reached out and touched an
American. Those are the only two
things that will protect America from
this imminent, ongoing, and undisputed threat.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the
gentleman from South Carolina (Mr.
WILSON).
Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr.
Speaker, I thank Chairman BRIAN
MAST for yielding me time. I am grateful to support the resolution of Chairman BRIAN MAST.
Mr. Speaker, over the weekend, the
world
watched
President
Donald
Trump take courageous action against
the murderous regime in Tehran;
eliminating Khamenei with senior Iranian regime leaders, the architect of
decades of terror, repression, and aggression, killing thousands of Americans and allies over the years. The removal of this brutal dictator marks a
pivotal moment in the long struggle
against a regime that has destabilized
the Middle East and threatened global
security for more than four decades, repressing the great people of Iran.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.048

H04MRPT1

H2394

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Additionally, with the removal of the
Syrian dictator Assad, who has fled to
Moscow, appropriately, to be with war
criminal Putin, we now have a new
government in Syria with Ahmed alSharaa. With that government, President Donald Trump is leading a bipartisan effort to give Syria a chance and
give the Middle East a chance for peace
and prosperity. Again, it is bipartisan,
working together.
My appreciation of the courageous
decision by President Donald Trump to
remove the dictatorship in Tehran is
personal. I have four sons who have
served overseas facing the Iranian
IEDs, drones, snipers, and missile attacks. Alan served in Iraq field artillery with cross-country convoys, receiving a Combat Action Badge. Add
was a Navy doctor in Bagdad. Julian
was a signal officer in Egypt with
Bright Star, and Hunter served as an
engineer for a year in Afghanistan.
The American people have never forgotten the crimes of the Iranian regime. From the 1979 seizure of the embassy in Tehran and the disgusting
hostage crisis that led to 52 Americans
being captive for 444 days, freed by
President Ronald Reagan, to decades of
sponsoring terrorism through puppets
such
as
Hezbollah,
Hamas,
and
Houthis, Iranian leadership has consistently chosen mass murder over
peace and prosperity.
President Trump is sending a clear
message that those who threaten the
United States, our partners, and allies
will ultimately be held accountable
even after 47 years.
While this operation marks a historic
strategic victory, it also comes at a
solemn cost. Six brave American servicemembers have lost their lives, with
many wounded. We mourn their sacrifice. These men and women stood on
the front lines of freedom to destroy
the Iranian missile threat, sinking the
Iranian navy, and by permanently ending the Iranian nuclear capability.
As the Iranian people look to the future, the American people will stand
with the Iranian people for freedom,
peace, and prosperity.
Today, we honor the courage of our
troops, reaffirm our commitment to
our allies, and recognize the leadership
of President Donald Trump in confronting a maniacal regime. America
remains vigilant, resolute, and committed to defending freedom wherever
it is threatened.
b 1450
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Florida
(Mr. MILLS), who is the chairman of the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Intelligence.
Mr. MILLS. Mr. Speaker, 47 years—I
am going to say it again: 47 years. That
is how long this evil regime has waged
war not only against the West and our
allies but Americans.
Whether it be the Beirut bombing,
whether it be the hostages, or whether

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:45 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

it be the violation of our own sovereign
territory of our embassies, make no
mistake about it: It was Iran and their
regime that actually waged war
against America—far longer than the
strategic strikes to eliminate the imminent threat that this regime posed.
My colleague from Florida has pointed out all the different occasions in
which this regime has targeted Americans. Let me point out the fact that
not only are they engaged in the illicit
trade and drug trafficking of Captagon,
not only are they going ahead and
leveraging sanctioned oil to countries
like China and others to fund these
proxy militias—we are talking about
the worst of the worst, including the
Houthis over in Yemen and Hamas,
which
indiscriminately
murdered,
raped, and showed barbarism on October 7 in Israel.
Look at Hezbollah under Hassan
Nasrallah, who was responsible not
only for the slaughtering of Christians
in Lebanon but also for the targeting
of Americans with the expansion of
their militias in Iraq.
Hashd al-Shaabi and Asa’ib Ahl alHaq in Iraq are responsible for more attacks against American troops and
contractors, as well as for rocket attacks on our embassies, than any
other.
The list goes on and on, Mr. Chairman. We can talk about the fact that
we want to go back to Article I, Section 8, Clause 11 responsibilities of declarations of war, but I would argue that
my colleague on the left has also voted
for the Authorization for Use of Military Force as an abdication of those responsibilities.
I would also argue the fact, as the
chairman had talked about, while you
are right that a piece of paper isn’t
going to change things, it sends a clear
message that this body stands unified
in acknowledging that this state sponsor of terror will not have a reign any
longer, thanks to President Donald J.
Trump and the decisive action to guarantee that their nuclear enrichment
program will not continue to thrive.
Their mid-range ballistic missiles,
their long-range ballistic missiles, and
their ICBMs will not threaten American lives any longer.
Our servicemembers who are deployed in the region can sleep peacefully at night knowing that they are
not going to have Shahed-136s or other
attack drones killing them in their
sleep.
I would also go ahead and iterate the
fact that I can guarantee the six new
Gold Star families and those six new
heroes will be proud to know that we
haven’t forgotten and that we are
going to continue to acknowledge that
this evil regime is the greatest state
sponsor of terror.
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to
support this resolution, and I thank
the chairman for giving me this time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I reserve
the balance of my time.

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, it is Florida
day. I yield an additional 3 minutes to
the gentleman from Florida (Mr. FINE).
Mr. FINE. Mr. Speaker, I approach
this debate from a very simple perspective: When people say they want to kill
you, you should believe them.
For 47 years, the Iranian Government
in their version of this Hall, on the
streets, on television, anywhere they
can find, has yelled ‘‘death to America.’’ They don’t just yell it. They actually do it. Over those 47 years, it is
estimated that 1,200 Americans have
been killed by those saying ‘‘death to
America.’’
Not all of those were military. On October 7, Hamas, directly funded by
Iran, killed 46 Americans—46.
We hear a lot about how bad they
are. We can agree they are bad, but
there is always a ‘‘but’’—‘‘but we
shouldn’t do anything,’’ I guess.
Again, I believe that when someone
tells you thousands of times over 47
years that they want to kill you, you
should believe them.
This resolution makes a simple
premise that we cannot allow Iran to
get nuclear weapons. Why? We cannot
allow Iran to get nuclear weapons because of the second thing Iran seeks to
do: create missile capability to deliver
those missiles to the United States of
America. We have to stop them from
creating the missile shield, the drones,
and the shorter missiles that they can
use to overwhelm our forces in the region, that gives them a shield to continue to deliver those weapons.
We have a choice. We can say: Well,
they say ‘‘death to America,’’ but they
aren’t really going to do it, or we can
realize they have given us 1,200 reasons
over the last 47 years to believe them.
I hope this passes unanimously. It
certainly should. It is three lines long,
this resolution. It says that: ‘‘The
House of Representatives declares it is
the policy of the United States that
Iran continues to be the largest state
sponsor of terrorism.’’ That is all it
does.
If you believe like I do when people
say ‘‘death to America’’ you should believe them, then you should vote for
this, and this should be an easy vote. I
thank the chairman for bringing this
up today, and I hope all of my colleagues will support it.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I reserve
the balance of my time.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Montana (Mr. ZINKE).
Mr. ZINKE. Mr. Speaker, while we all
in this body mourn the deaths of our
six heroes, we should remember that
earlier, as a deputy commander of the
Special Forces of Iraq, I lost many
friends as a result of Iran sponsoring
weapons targeting. One of them was
Command Sergeant Michael Stack
killed by Iranian weapons and targeting in April 2004.
We should also recognize in Gaza the
murder of over 2,000 innocent civilians
in unspeakable ways would not have

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.049

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

happened without the direct support of
Khamenei and his evil regime and partners, Hamas, Hezbollah, and the
Houthis.
Iran is an evil empire—not the people—the Khamenei regime, which controls their great Iranian people and
does not allow prosperity. This resolution is pretty simple: for us all to recognize that evil exists, and the
Khamenei regime is the epitome of
evil.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I made very clear that
there is no disagreement in Congress
that Iran is a bad actor. It is a state
sponsor of terror.
b 1500
I have said it over and over again in
my career, and I think every Member
of Congress has said it over and over
again. That is really not what this concurrent resolution is really about. This
resolution really is a stunt meant to
try to cast a shadow on the imminent
Iran War Powers Resolution debate
that is going to follow this. This came
up today, just at the last minute, to
try to throw it in specifically because
of the debate.
Both things can be true, Mr. Speaker.
Congress can recognize that Iran is a
bad actor, as we have done multiple
times, and the President of the United
States cannot unilaterally drag our
country into war without congressional deliberation, debate, and authorization.
The Constitution of the United
States of America says that only Congress can declare war. So that is what
the next debate will be all about.
Do we want to live up to what we
took an oath of office and take a vote
for the American people to see where
everyone stands and to be sure that we
are not giving away our power to the
executive branch of government and
that we in Congress are going to do our
job that the Constitution states that
we should do?
If the Constitution wanted one person to make that decision, then it
would have so stated.
Yes, I will be voting for this resolution, absolutely, 100 percent. I have
voted for so many other similar resolutions over the years. However, I plan to
also do my constitutional duty to take
my responsibility, not to give it away
to the executive branch of government
and not to shrink from my responsibilities. I plan also on voting for the War
Powers Resolution on Iran in the debate immediately following this resolution which we have passed numerous
times in this House.
It is a stunt, but, unfortunately, that
is where we are, as opposed to doing
real business.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time to close.
Mr. Speaker, I am going to respond
to some of these comments as well. My

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:45 Mar 05, 2026

H2395

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

colleague has said things that we agree
on: Iran is a bad actor, and Iran is a
state sponsor of terror. He said that
there is no dispute about these things.
My colleague has also said that he
will vote for the upcoming War Powers
Resolution. There is not a resolution
that is coming before us that gives the
President any authority or authorizes
the military to defend the United
States of America in any way, shape,
or form against that threat that there
is no dispute about, that bad actor, as
it was characterized, that state sponsor
of terror that everybody agrees on.
There is no War Powers Resolution
coming that says: Go out there, and
under these parameters, defend the
United States of America.
President Trump is utilizing his Article II authority, his constitutional Article II authority, to defend the United
States of America against that imminent threat that we agree upon.
What my colleagues ask is that the
President do nothing to defend the
United States of America.
My colleague talked about this resolution that outlines all of these historical actions and that we affirm Iran is
the largest state sponsor of terror. It
does nothing. He acknowledges he has
voted on resolutions just like that
many times. That is true. Nothing has
happened until we have President
Trump willing to utilize his Article II
authority to defend the United States
of America against an imminent
threat.
Mr. Speaker, I urge passage of this
resolution affirming that Iran is the
largest state sponsor of terror. Apparently, many of our colleagues have forgotten that they have voted on that,
have forgotten that that is the case,
have forgotten that that is the enemy
that comes against us, and have forgotten that they pose that imminent
threat against us every single day utilizing every single opportunity that
they can to attack Americans.
I will close with this, Mr. Speaker: I
thank President Trump for the first
time avenging every single American
who has been killed by the hand of
Iran. That was not the purpose of this
operation, but it is the purpose of my
personal thanks.
Thank you, President Trump, for
avenging every servicemember who
was killed by the hand of Iran, every
contractor, every civilian who has been
harmed throughout the Middle East,
and every person wrongfully detained.
For every single person killed by
that hand of Iran, I thank you, President Trump, for finally stepping up and
defending the United States of America.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
question is on the motion offered by
the gentleman from Florida (Mr. MAST)
that the House suspend the rules and
agree to the resolution (H. Res. 1099).
The question was taken.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. In the
opinion of the Chair, two-thirds being
in the affirmative, the ayes have it.

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this motion will be postponed.
f

DIRECTING THE PRESIDENT PURSUANT TO SECTION 5(C) OF THE
WAR POWERS RESOLUTION TO
REMOVE UNITED STATES ARMED
FORCES FROM UNAUTHORIZED
HOSTILITIES IN THE ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF IRAN
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, pursuant to
the order of the House of March 3, 2026,
I call up the concurrent resolution (H.
Con. Res. 38) directing the President
pursuant to section 5(c) of the War
Powers Resolution to remove United
States Armed Forces from unauthorized hostilities in the Islamic Republic
of Iran, and ask for its immediate consideration in the House.
The Clerk read the title of the concurrent resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to the order of the House of March
3, 2026, the concurrent resolution is
considered read.
The text of the concurrent resolution
is as follows:
H. CON. RES. 38
Resolved by the House of Representatives (the
Senate concurring),
SECTION 1. FINDINGS.

Congress makes the following findings:
(1) Congress has the sole power to declare
war under article 1, section 8, clause 11 of the
United States Constitution.
(2) Congress has not declared war with respect to, or provided a specific statutory authorization for, hostilities involving United
States Armed Forces against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
(3) Section 5(c) of the War Powers Resolution (50 U.S.C. 1544(c)) states that ‘‘at any
time that United States Armed Forces are
engaged in hostilities outside the territory
of the United States, its possessions and territories without a declaration of war or specific statutory authorization, such forces
shall be removed by the President if Congress so directs.’’
SEC. 2. TERMINATION OF THE USE OF UNITED
STATES FORCES FOR HOSTILITIES
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OR IRAN.
(a) TERMINATION.—Pursuant to section 5(c)

of the War Powers Resolution (50 U.S.C.
1544(c)), Congress hereby directs the President to terminate the use of United States
Armed Forces from hostilities against the Islamic Republic of Iran or any part of its government or military, unless explicitly authorized by a declaration of war or specific
authorization for use of military force
against Iran.
(b) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prevent the
United States from defending itself from imminent attack.
SEC. 3. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION REGARDING INTELLIGENCE SHARING.

Nothing in this joint resolution may be
construed to influence or disrupt any intelligence, counterintelligence, or investigative
activities relating to threats in or emanating from Iran conducted by, or in conjunction with, the United States Government involving—

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.052

H04MRPT1

H2396

(1) the collection of intelligence;
(2) the analysis of intelligence; or
(3) the sharing of intelligence between the
United States and any coalition partner if
the President determines such sharing is appropriate and in the national security interests of the United States.
SEC. 4. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION REGARDING NO
AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF MILITARY FORCE.

Consistent with section 8(a)(1) of the War
Powers Resolution (50 U.S.C. 1547(a)(1)),
nothing in this concurrent resolution may be
construed as authorizing the use of military
force.

The SPEAKER pro tempore. The concurrent resolution shall be debatable
for 2 hours, equally divided and controlled by the chair and ranking minority member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs or their respective designees.
The gentleman from Florida (Mr.
MAST) and the gentleman from New
York (Mr. MEEKS) each will control 60
minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman
from Florida.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I ask unanimous consent that all Members may
have 5 legislative days in which to revise and extend their remarks and include any extraneous material on the
resolution under consideration.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Florida?
There was no objection.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, the Trump administration exhausted every single diplomatic
effort that they could with Iran, as did
previous administrations. Iran would
not see reason. Operation Epic Fury is
a legal and necessary exercise of Article II authority to address the imminent threat posed by Iran.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, in Donald Trump’s own
words and the Secretary of Defense
Pete Hegseth’s own words, the United
States is at war with Iran.
The question is: Did Congress authorize the war as the Constitution requires?
Did the President present anything
before Congress?
Did the Congress have any debate?
Did any administrative authority
come before the House Foreign Affairs
Committee to testify?
The answer to that is no.
The question is: Was there any imminent threat requiring the use of force?
The administration has not presented
one. In fact, the word ‘‘imminent’’ does
not appear even once in the administration’s own war powers notification.
Mr. Speaker, you can’t find the word
‘‘imminent.’’
b 1510
Did the Trump administration even
bother making the case to the Amer-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:45 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

ican people or to Congress? Just 8 days
ago, during the State of the Union Address, the most visible platform a
President has, he could have laid out
the rationale for military action, as
other Presidents have. Instead, Iran
was just a footnote in a record-long
speech.
This is a war of choice that was
launched by this administration without authorization, without clearly
stating
objectives
or
a
defined
endgame, and without explaining how
they intend to keep Americans safe.
The chaos unleashed will not be
borne by the President’s family. It will
be borne by our men and women in uniform who will face retaliation from
Iran and its proxy networks. It will be
borne by innocent civilians at heightened risk of attacks from Iran’s aligned
terrorist cells. It will be borne by
American families paying more for groceries, for electricity, and for gasoline,
all for Donald Trump’s war of choice.
Americans woke up on Saturday to
the news that the United States is
again at war in the Middle East. They
don’t know for how long because the
President has not articulated a clearly
defined endgame. Military action without a defined strategy invites escalation, mission creep, and failure. We
should have learned this lesson already. Why? We should have learned it
already from Iraq, Afghanistan, and
Vietnam.
As Benjamin Franklin once said:
When you fail to plan, you plan to fail.
This War Powers Resolution is simple. This is not a vote on Authorization
for Use of Military Force. This simply
demands that the President of the
United States come to Congress, as our
Constitution demands, to seek authorization for what he, himself, has described as a war.
Just abide by the Constitution. We
all bring our hands up and swear when
we are sworn in and say we will abide
by the Constitution. You would think
that the President of the United States
would do just that.
This War Powers Resolution does not
prevent the United States from defending itself. It does not stop the President from responding to an imminent
attack. It does not limit us from protecting our troops.
I have served in Congress for 28
years, and I have been in this Chamber
as this body has done its most sacred
and serious work deliberating whether
to send our American servicemembers
into harm’s way. It is a difficult vote.
It is a serious vote. Probably—not
probably—without question, the hardest votes that I have ever had to take,
but that is my responsibility. I took a
pledge to the Constitution that I would
follow it.
I was here for the vote after 9/11 to go
into Afghanistan, a heavy decision.
The President brought information in.
We had dialogue. We had conversation.
We had debate. We did something else.
In the House Foreign Affairs Committee, we had hearings. We had administration officials come in.

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

I wasn’t even the ranking member or
the chair or anything else. I was just a
member of the committee. I could call
the administration and say: I need to
speak to a Deputy Secretary or the
Secretary, and they would come into
my office, and we would have this dialogue to determine whether or not we
were going to go into this war.
Has that happened now? For over a
year, for all the times, not once, not
once have we had a hearing in the
House Foreign Affairs Committee. We
have asked to have individuals who
were negotiating. Unfortunately, some
of them are not employed by the State
Department, et cetera, like Mr.
Kushner and Mr. Witkoff, who all are
friends of the President’s, basically
real estate negotiators who were just
half an hour in Geneva, flipping back
and forth from two major negotiations.
If it was serious, I wouldn’t have been
in the White House, when the President
was supposed to have been honoring individuals after we had lost the lives of
six servicemembers, talking about curtains and how I redecorated the White
House. This is too serious a decision for
me and I would hope for the President
of the United States also.
Getting the facts in Iraq, the Secretary of State came before and testified, went before the U.N., talked to
the American people. Now, I disagreed
because I didn’t see the connections
after I got the information on Iraq, so
I voted no. I agreed on Afghanistan.
However, the point here is, the President obeyed the Constitution because
he came to Congress first and allowed
the Members of Congress to make a determination.
What has happened year after year in
my time here, I have watched Congress
gradually relinquish its authority on
matters of war to the executive branch.
We have allowed overly broad Authorizations for the Use of Military Force
to remain on the books. We have permitted Presidents of both parties to
commit forces without a vote. This war
with Iran is the most extreme example
of that abdication.
The Framers rejected the idea of a
king, meaning one person making a decision without consultation, without
giving any reason to this body. It was
absolutely rejected. We are not under
an authoritarian government, like Russia, for example, where Vladimir Putin
can go to war and he doesn’t have to
worry about the Duma. They are not a
body that has the responsibility that
we have in this Congress, so he can go
on and fight a war that he has created
without worrying about having to talk
and being accountable to anyone.
Our Founding Fathers did not want
that. They didn’t want a king. That is
why we were created as a body. It is
long past time for us to reclaim and
stand up for that authority, for I tell
you, even though he may want to think
he is, Donald Trump is not a king.
If he believes the war with Iran is in
our national interests, then he must
come to Congress and make the case.

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.026

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Show the facts. Show what the intelligence says. Come to Congress and
allow us to ask the questions.
b 1520
We have had three scenarios. The socalled Gang of Eight met once. Then
they got another phone call right beforehand. Then the so-called Gang of 20
met once. That is all we have heard
from the President.
I oppose this war of choice, but guess
what, Mr. Speaker, each Member here
must make clear with their own vote
where they stand on that decision.
The President has initiated hostilities without a clear mission and
without a coherent strategy and without a defined endgame.
Some Members of Congress may decide after they see everything—we may
not see it together in the same way,
but the evidence and the case comes
here and then we take a vote. As was
the occasion for me back in 2003, I
voted one way, and the majority voted
another way. The President had the authority. Another time, I voted the way
the majority voted. But each time they
came to us. That is what this debate is
about and that is what we need to do.
Now, as I see this, the President has
initiated hostilities without a clear
mission, without a coherent strategy,
and without a defined endgame. This
open-ended, undefined military engagement is precisely what the War Powers
Resolution was designed to restrain.
We are not the Iranian Parliament. We
are not a rubberstamp Congress, or at
least we shouldn’t be a rubberstamp
Congress. However, in this scenario, we
see that whatever this President
wants, my colleagues on the other side
will just rubberstamp it.
We should be a coequal branch of
government, and our duty is not optional. It was written in the Constitution. The Framers gave Congress this
authority because they believed no single person should have the power to
take this Nation to war alone.
Today, we either defend the principle
or we surrender it. I choose to defend
the Constitution and defend the principle and do my job that I put my hand
up and swore I would. Hard votes, easy
votes, I will take them all because that
is what I swore an oath to do.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, my colleague talked
about choices. Defending yourself is a
choice. It is a choice that not everybody makes. Some people, instead of
defending themselves, curl up into a
corner and cry and turn their eyes.
Some people stand up and step into the
fight and make the tough choice of
going through the battles that it takes
to defend yourself.
I will thank, again, President Trump
for defending America from an imminent threat, an imminent threat that
no other President has had the guts to
stand up to.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:51 Mar 05, 2026

H2397

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

What is that imminent threat? What
was that imminent threat that President Trump is doing his duty, his constitutional duty, his Article II authority to defend America against?
I will tell you it is something that almost every single Member of Congress
has literally agreed upon up until
President Trump decided to defend
America.
Previously, almost every Member of
Congress voted to call Iran the largest
state sponsor of terror, and tomorrow
we will cast a vote on what was just debated about reaffirming that they are
the largest state sponsor of terror.
Nearly all Members unanimously
voted to condemn their continuous
funding of terrorist proxies like Hamas
and Hezbollah. What does that mean?
It means they give them money. They
give them weapons. They give them
training. They give them direction on
where to find and how to kill Americans, and then they reward them for
doing that. Almost every Member of
Congress has voted unanimously to
condemn that.
It was almost a unanimous vote calling their nuclear program a massive
threat to the United States of America.
My colleague over there voted in the
affirmative on that. Almost every one
of us voted to designate the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps as a terrorist organization.
Those votes didn’t just happen for no
reason. We have seen Iran as an imminent threat against America, not just
for the last 4 days, not just for the last
4 months, or 4 years, but for the last 40
years.
Why do they continue to be an imminent threat? Because they have never
faced an imminent response until
President Trump. Instead, we told
them—when I say ‘‘we,’’ I could say
America, but really it was my Democrat colleagues that told them this.
They told them how much uranium
they could enrich instead of they can’t
do it, period. We told them when they
could have a nuclear weapon instead of
no. On top of that—again, I say ‘‘we’’
because it is America, but it was really
my Democrat colleagues—gave them
pallets of cash. That is a fact.
I especially, as many of my other colleagues, wouldn’t take this away from
anybody here. No one wants to see our
military go into ‘‘combat,’’ ‘‘war,’’
‘‘conduct combat operations,’’ ‘‘battle,’’ or whatever word somebody wants
to use to describe it. I do not want to
see conflicts end in casualties.
I wear many names on my wrist of
friends that I have lost, but Iran’s terror, which has caused the death of
thousands of Americans, has to stop.
They don’t warn us when they are
going to kill Americans. They are an
imminent threat. They look for a surprise. They look for an opportunity,
any weakness, any moment that they
can go out there and attack us. They
are an imminent threat. There has
proven no other way to stop this imminent threat, not by negotiation, not by
accord, and not by summit.

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Let us talk about this imminent
threat. Three U.S. soldiers killed at
Tower 22 a year and a half ago: Sergeant Sanders, Sergeant Moffett, and
Sergeant Rivers. This is an imminent
threat. Countless civilian vessels targeted by Iranian drones. That is what
an imminent threat looks like.
This one just pisses me off beyond belief. Ten U.S. Navy sailors captured
and held on their knees at gunpoint by
the Iranian Navy. This is an imminent
threat.
The October 7 attack, killing 1,200 civilians, including 46 Americans, was
supported by Iran. Again, that is an
imminent threat.
This is very personal to me. Iran’s
killing of an estimated one in six
American servicemembers in Iraq between 2003 and 2011. That is an imminent threat.
Beyond that, U.S. fighter jets lost,
sunk off one of our carriers in the Red
Sea because of Houthi attacks. That is
an imminent threat. If you ask an
American whether they want war or
combat—you can ask me that question.
I would say no. I don’t want it. I have
been in it.
b 1530
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want it for my
children. We do want the President to
stop Iran’s imminent threats.
If I asked if anyone wants combat,
anybody with sense would say no.
What do people want us to do if there
are 10 American Navy men and women
put on their knees at gunpoint by Iran?
They want us to take care of that. Do
they want us to go into combat? No,
they do not.
What do people want us to do if there
are three American servicemembers
killed at Tower 22 by that imminent
threat? They want us to take care of
that. This is what taking care of that
looks like.
President Trump has been clear, consistent, and transparent. Iran cannot
have a nuclear weapon. He made every
effort to address this through diplomatic means.
Let me quote directly from a resolution that Democrats, including my colleagues, overwhelmingly supported:
‘‘The House of Representatives declares
it is the policy of the United States
. . . to use all means necessary to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear
weapon.’’
Leader JEFFRIES voted on it. Ranking
Member MEEKS voted on it. Speaker
Emerita PELOSI voted on it. Did they
not believe it when they voted on it?
Did they not read it? Did they not understand ‘‘use all means necessary to
prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear
weapon’’?
We all know Iran poses an imminent
threat to the United States. The only
difference now is that President Trump
is sitting in office.
Right now, our military is shooting
down Iranian missiles and drones that
are targeting Americans in the region.
If Democrats had their way and this

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.056

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2398

resolution passed, they would force the
United States military to pack up, stop
shooting down missiles, and tell every
American sheltering in place and every
ally fighting against this regime that
America is no longer there to help.
While this does not fit the narrative
of my Democrat colleagues, President
Trump had the authority to get the job
done under Article II of the Constitution and the War Powers Resolution.
He has been transparent with this
Congress. Secretary Rubio, Secretary
Hegseth, General Caine, and CIA Director Ratcliffe have all conducted now
three specific briefs, making our objective clear: destroy every single piece of
Iranian military hardware that can
reach out and touch Americans or has
been used to reach out and touch
Americans.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, all I will say is that if
Iran has been an imminent threat for
47 years, the word ‘‘imminent’’ then
loses all meaning.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the
gentleman from New York (Mr.
JEFFRIES), the Democratic leader in
the United States House of Representatives, from Brooklyn, New York.
Mr. JEFFRIES. Mr. Speaker, I thank
my good friend, the distinguished gentleman from Queens and the great
State of New York, the once and future
chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr. MEEKS, for his leadership
and for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today in strong
support of the American people, in support of our men and women in uniform,
in support of the United States Constitution, and in support of this War
Powers Resolution.
As we gather here today on the floor
of the House of Representatives, there
are mothers and fathers across this
country who are in mourning, confronting the heartbreaking loss of their
loved ones in uniform.
My prayers are with the families of
the six American servicemembers who
have been killed overseas in Donald
Trump’s war of choice. We are thankful
for their heroism, their bravery, and
their patriotism. May their memories
always be a blessing.
Mr. Speaker, every Member who
serves in this Chamber has sworn an
oath of office. It seems as though many
of my Republican colleagues have forgotten that. Let me remind them, in
part, as to what it says: ‘‘I do solemnly
swear that I will support and defend
the Constitution of the United States
against all enemies, foreign and domestic . . . so help me God.’’
In this remarkable country, the
greatest Nation in the history of the
world, we don’t swear an oath to a
king, to a political party, or to a man
bent on desecrating the Oval Office. In
the Congress, in the courts, and in the
military, we swear an oath to the
United States Constitution.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:51 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. Speaker, when the Framers
drafted that glorious document, they
feared the rise of a monarch, a demagogue, a tyrant. Today, we are here on
the House floor because the Constitution, the binding document that makes
us all Americans, is being trampled on
by a wannabe king.
As Members of the House of Representatives, the branch of government
that the Framers decided would be the
closest to the American people, to reflect the hopes, the dreams, the aspirations, the fears, the concerns, the anxieties, the life experiences, and the passions of the American people, we have
a solemn obligation.
Democrats and Republicans alike, we
are all guardians of the American people and of the Constitution. We swore
an oath that compels us to ensure that
this President’s modern-day injuries
and abuses come to an end.
We are at war now in the Middle
East, spending billions of dollars to
bomb Iran, when Republicans refused
to find a dime to make healthcare affordable for the American people and
to make sure that everyday Americans
can go see a doctor when they need
one.
This war has not been authorized by
the people’s Representatives here in
this glorious House. Article I of the
Constitution explicitly provides Congress with the sole authority to declare
war. There is nothing ambiguous about
that.
The Framers made that decision because they were concerned about kings
who, throughout time, plunged their
people into unnecessary wars, impoverishing them, or imperiling their lives
by sending them off to a foreign conflict, often to pillage the resources of
others for the benefit of a tyrant and
his family. Sound familiar?
That is why the power to declare war
was given explicitly to the House and
to the Senate. It was given to the people’s Representatives.
Abraham Lincoln, as a Member of
this House in 1848, once profoundly observed: ‘‘The provision of the Constitution giving the warmaking power to
Congress, was dictated, as I understand
it, by the following reasons—Kings had
always been involving and impoverishing their people in wars, pretending
generally, if not always, that the good
of the people was the object. This, our
convention understood to be the most
oppressive of all kingly oppressions;
and they resolved to so frame the Constitution that no one man should hold
the power of bringing this oppression
upon us.’’
That is from then Republican Congressman Abraham Lincoln, 1848.
That is why we have advanced this
War Powers Resolution today. Donald
Trump intentionally refused to get authorization from Congress for this war
of choice, a war that has now exploded
to more than 10 countries across the
Middle East.
b 1540
Mr. Speaker, the President has not
even bothered to offer a coherent an-

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

swer to the most basic questions that
any Commander in Chief should address when making the solemn decision
to take us to war: Why are we doing
this? What are our objectives? How will
this all end?
Mr. Speaker, if this military action,
this war, is so principled, why is the
President unwilling or unable to make
his case directly to the American people?
If the tremendous cost to American
taxpayers in terms of sacred human
lives and our Nation’s precious resources is so justified, why does the
President’s rationale and the administration’s rationale change every single
day?
Mr. Speaker, make no mistake. Iran
is a bad actor. They must be confronted for their nuclear aspirations,
painful human rights abuses, and repression of its own people, including
the slaughter of thousands of civilians
during the recent protests.
It is the leading state sponsor of terrorism. It is a brutal regime that presents a serious threat to our allies in
the Middle East, including Israel, Jordan, and the Gulf states. Yet, the
President has a responsibility to justify plunging America into another war
that will cost more American lives and
billions of dollars, if not trillions of
dollars, in taxpayer resources. That is
the President’s obligation, and he has
fallen woefully short of that responsibility.
Mr. Speaker, the Trump administration has offered at least five different
reasons to justify the war, all of which
are built on deception and misdirection.
First, Donald Trump claimed that
the U.S. would attack Iran to protect
the demonstrators who were risking
their lives to demand democratic
change. He even urged them weeks ago
to rise up and seize state institutions.
As the regime cracked down brutally,
killing tens of thousands of their own
citizens, the President did nothing.
Even as Donald Trump urged ordinary Iranians to take greater risks,
there was never a viable military option for defending unarmed protesters
against a brutal police state without
sending hundreds of thousands of
American troops into Iran. It was an
empty pledge to the Iranian people
that the current bombing campaign
does nothing to undo.
Second, Donald Trump and his advisers claimed that Iran’s unwillingness
to negotiate away its nuclear program
left no choice but for us to attack.
Mr. Speaker, this is the very same
person who told the country last summer that Iran’s nuclear program was
completely and totally obliterated.
This is the same administration whose
Department of Defense has said that
the Iranian nuclear program was set
back several years and whose State Department has said that Iran isn’t even
enriching uranium today.
Mr. Speaker, was the Commander in
Chief confused in June, or is he confused right now?

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.058

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026

It was not long ago when America
could be sure that we were preventing
Iran from pursuing a nuclear weapon.
The Iran nuclear agreement successfully did that until Donald Trump
recklessly decided to pull the plug because he suffers from Obama derangement syndrome.
The President has spent much of the
past year trying and failing to restore
the same negotiated safeguards that he
abandoned for partisan political reasons, and because of his failure to negotiate the guardrails that he destroyed,
he has now taken us to war.
Third, President Trump claims that
Iran poses an imminent threat to the
United States through its development
of intercontinental ballistic missiles
that could perhaps someday reach our
shores. If Iran is actually on the verge
of having that capability, the President should provide the evidence, but
no such evidence has been presented to
this Congress or to the American people. We could only assume that it does
not exist.
Fourth, Donald Trump said that he
wanted to achieve regime change. Donald Trump is an individual who promised Americans on the campaign trail
that launching regime-change wars in
the Middle East has been one of the
most foolish and costly things that the
United States has ever done. Those are
Donald Trump’s words on the campaign
trail.
Candidate Trump said that, if elected, he would never get our country into
an endless regime war. President
Trump has now done the exact opposite.
Regime-change wars are among the
most expensive things that we can undertake. And yes, Secretary Hegseth,
for decades, they have failed to accomplish their objective.
Vietnam was a regime-change war.
Afghanistan was a regime-change war.
Iraq was a regime-change war. Despite
the incredible bravery of our heroes
and patriots, due to failed policy decisions, they didn’t work out.
Even if the Iranian regime were to
fall, we have no way to control what
comes next, which most experts believe
would be the Iranian Revolutionary
Guard-led government rising up and
being just as repressive and antagonistic as the current theocracy and
perhaps even more committed to the
acquisition of nuclear weapons.
Fifth and most recently, Donald
Trump said: I ‘‘had a feeling’’ Iran
would attack first, as some sort of rationale for going to war. Donald Trump
had a feeling that Iran would attack.
The United States Government has
initiated a war and put American lives
at risk. Six patriots have already been
killed. Thousands of American citizens
are stranded in the Middle East, and he
has plunged the entire Middle East into
a war and chaos over a feeling.
It is outrageous. It is unacceptable.
It shocks the conscience.
In the last few days, six servicemembers have died, and the Trump adminis-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:51 Mar 05, 2026

H2399

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

tration has acknowledged that more of
our heroes are going to be killed. We
have no concrete justification for why
we are putting American troops in
harm’s way and spending billions of
dollars on a foreign war while the affordability crisis rages here at home—
a crisis Donald Trump said he would fix
on day one but, instead, Republican
policies have made worse.
Taxpayer dollars should be used to
drop grocery prices, drop housing costs,
and drop health insurance premiums.
Instead, Donald Trump is spending billions of taxpayer dollars to drop bombs
in the Middle East.
Mr. Speaker, the President’s war is
unwise. It is unpopular, unauthorized,
unlawful, and unconstitutional. In the
United States, we serve the rule of law,
not the rule of man.
James Madison once wrote in 1788:
‘‘The accumulation of all powers, legislative, executive, and judiciary, in the
same hands . . . may justly be pronounced the very definition of tyranny.’’
Our Constitution requires the President get approval from Congress before
launching a war. That has not happened, and that is why this bipartisan
resolution, led by Democrats, is on the
floor of the House of Representatives
today.
b 1550
In their wisdom, the Framers believed that they had made it impossible
for a President to do what Donald
Trump has just done and that no other
President has done before: launched a
major war in the Middle East without
the approval of Congress.
That is what Donald Trump’s time in
office has been all about: failure after
failure, betrayal after betrayal, disaster after disaster.
In his return to the Presidency, Mr.
Speaker, Donald Trump has left America less prosperous, less safe, and less
free. He has hurt us again and again,
failed us again and again, and now, by
launching this unauthorized war of
choice, he is setting fire to our Constitution.
The American people deserve better.
Democrats are committed to continuing to fight to use American taxpayer dollars to lower the high costs of
living, to fix our broken healthcare
system, and to clean up corruption.
I stand on the floor here today to
make sure that those taxpayer dollars
are being used in ways that are designed to make life better for the
American people, not launching another endless war in the Middle East
that is destined to cost more American
lives and waste billions, if not trillions,
in taxpayer dollars.
Democrats are here to stand up for
the American people. Democrats are
here to stand up for our men and
women in uniform. Democrats are here
to stand up for the rule of law and the
United States Constitution. Democrats
will not rest until this national nightmare has ended and America can con-

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

tinue to march toward a more perfect
Union.
Vote ‘‘yes’’ on this War Powers Resolution.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I heard a lot
there. I didn’t hear any discussion of
Article II authority. I heard a lot of
reminiscing, but I didn’t hear any
reminiscing about Libya either.
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to yield 4
minutes to the gentleman from Texas
(Mr. MCCAUL), the chairman emeritus
of the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
Mr. MCCAUL. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the chairman for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, in 1979, the Islamic Revolution began, and a dark veil of terror
descended upon the Middle East. Since
then, Iran has operated as the nucleus
to the world’s most dangerous terror
network.
When the withdrawal from Afghanistan set the world on fire, the regime
grew even more emboldened, fanning
the flames of chaos and violence beyond its borders. From that moment
onward, China, Russia, and Iran have
been locked together in an unholy alliance which seeks to destroy Western
values and upend the global balance of
power.
Iran has played a key role in these
malign efforts, arming Russia with lethal drones to massacre Ukrainians
and fueling China’s military machine
through illicit sales of oil. Its terror
proxies,
Hamas,
Houthis,
and
Hezbollah, have sown terror and instability across the world.
This is a regime that values martyrdom over prosperity and chaos over
peace. From their legacy of American
bloodshed in Beirut and the USS Cole
to harboring terrorists after 9/11, to
backing Hamas’ unprovoked October 7
attacks that killed 46 Americans, a regime this murderous can never be allowed to have a nuclear weapon.
Thanks to President Trump and Operation Epic Fury, the dark shroud
that covered the Middle East for nearly
five decades has now been lifted. The
people of Iran, who have suffered so
greatly at the hands of the ayatollah,
finally have a chance for freedom.
This is a historic moment, one that
could finally put the Middle East on
the path to peace. In my judgment,
Iran’s decision to hit our partners was
a severe miscalculation, turning the
Gulf nations against Iran. Meanwhile,
the regime’s so-called allies, Russia
and China, have abandoned Iran. Iran
is isolated and now an island. Normalization between Israel and the Arab nations, as envisioned in the Abraham
Accords, is now at hand.
Despite these truths, Congressional
Democrats are seeking to force President Trump to halt Epic Fury mid-operation, risking the objectives of this
critical mission, solely for political
purposes.
Now is not the time to tie the hands
of our Commander in Chief, and it is
also not the time to hold up DHS funding.
Even before Operation Epic Fury, the
threat landscape was at an all-time

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.059

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2400

high. President Biden’s open border allowed more than 700 Iranian nationals
to enter our country and more than
18,000 known or suspected terrorists.
As former chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security, I know
all too well how sleeper cells can execute foreign-inspired or foreign-directed acts of terrorism within our borders.
I have already seen that happen in
my hometown of Austin, where three
people were tragically killed over the
weekend at the hands of a terrorist.
Operation Epic Fury confronts this
threat head-on, severing the tentacles
Iran has wrapped around the globe to
strangle peace and spread terror.
The ayatollah’s reign of terror began
with weak leadership from President
Carter. It will end with strong leadership from President Trump.
This War Powers Resolution is illtimed and ill-advised. Congress must
stand with the President and our military to finally close once and for all
this dark chapter of history and pave
the way for lasting peace.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I have to
say I heard one of the craziest things
from my colleague just a couple of
minutes ago: That if something has
been going on for 40 years, it can’t be
imminent. It can’t meet the definition
of imminent if it has been going on for
40 years. That is one of the most absurd
things I have ever heard.
If every day I walk out of my house
and get my tail kicked by somebody,
that is the exact definition of imminent. It will happen tomorrow and the
next day until I finally step up, grow a
spine, and prevent it from happening.
It is one of the most absurd arguments
I have ever heard.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from California (Ms. PELOSI), the person who is
the greatest Speaker in the history of
the United States Congress, the first
woman, and the distinguished Speaker
Emerita.
Ms. PELOSI. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman for yielding and for his
kind words but, more importantly, for
his leadership in bringing us together
today and for his great statement and
that of our distinguished leader, Mr.
JEFFRIES, that we heard earlier.
Mr. Speaker, I stand here as former
leader, but also as one with 30 years of
experience in intelligence. I think this
is a very important debate for us to
have. There are two debates going on
here. One is the debate as to the Constitution of the United States. The
other is whether Iran should have a nuclear weapon, which everyone agrees
they should not, but that doesn’t mean
the Constitution of the United States
should be a casualty of that because
the administration wants to take a
shortcut to the war.
I rise in mourning for the brave servicemembers who have given their lives
in this conflict. I honor their ultimate

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:51 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

sacrifice and pray for them, their families, and all who were injured in this so
far.
I had some veterans in my office, Mr.
Speaker, earlier today on two different
occasions, and they talked about the
fact that having six people killed so
early at the beginning of a conflict, an
initiation of hostilities is unacceptable. What is our plan? What do we
have in mind for them?
Again, everyone agrees Iran should
not have a nuclear weapon. To that
end, that is why I am so proud about
what President Obama did with this.
He was masterful in diplomacy and in
forging an agreement that verifiably
prevented Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon.
I have this book of statements from
our colleagues who told the President:
We need to see the substance of the
agreement. We need to see the validation and proof of it all. We need the
communication to the American people.
The President respected the Congress
and came and gave reasons, and this
was for an agreement. This President
won’t even come and give us the data
for an action of war.
b 1600
Let’s be clear. This is not a debate
about the merits of the war. That is another debate. It is a debate of the Constitution of the United States.
The beauty of the Constitution, central to it, is the separation of powers.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentlewoman from California.
Ms. PELOSI. The separation of powers, Article I, and in that Article I is
very importantly the power of the Congress to declare war.
Again, let us be serious about our
oath of office to protect and defend the
Constitution as we protect and defend
the people of our country. That is our
responsibility. That is what we will do.
I urge my colleagues to vote in support of the Constitution and then go on
to the debate of whether we should go
into Iran or how we go into Iran. I
think there will be some mixed views
on that, but that is a different subject.
I urge my colleagues to honor your
oath of office, honor the vision of our
Founders, and honor the sacrifice of
our men and women in uniform who
have gotten us here today.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. I
have three quick points.
Number one, it is Article II of the
Constitution that gives the President
the authority to defend us against the
imminent threat of Iran.
I would say that if the Iran nuclear
deal was so masterful, why didn’t they
bring it before Congress and before the
Senate?
The final point that I would make is
this: Again, last Congress, 354 Members
of Congress, including 150 Democrats

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

and Speaker Emerita PELOSI, who just
spoke, all voted ‘‘to use all means necessary to prevent Iran from obtaining a
nuclear weapon.’’ That was their vote.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 4 minutes to the
gentleman
from
Arkansas
(Mr.
CRAWFORD), the chairman of the Intelligence Committee.
Mr. CRAWFORD. Mr. Speaker, I
thank the chairman, my good friend,
Mr. MAST, for yielding and for his leadership on highlighting the error of removing the United States’ Armed
Forces from a conflict that will bring
an end to a 47-year engagement.
Mr. Speaker, make no mistake about
it: The Iranian regime is the largest
state sponsor of terrorism in the world.
Despite extensive diplomatic efforts,
the regime refuses to give up its nuclear weapon ambitions, its ballistic,
cruise, and antiship missile production
and proliferation, or its support of terror.
As Secretary Rubio said yesterday:
‘‘Iran is run by lunatics, religious fanatic lunatics. They have an ambition
to have nuclear weapons. They intend
to develop those nuclear weapons behind a program of missiles and drones
and terrorism that the world will not
be able to touch them for fear of those
things.’’
When these murderous despots tell us
that they want to eliminate us from
existence, which they have said time
and time again over the past 47 years,
and now, in a relatively short timeframe, they attempt to sprint to the
finish line by significantly hardening
their conventional defensive posture,
expediting the development of nuclear
weapons and showing their desperation
by slaughtering thousands of their own
people, it is clear that we have reached
the point of no return—a point after
which it is too late to respond.
We all know that we wouldn’t be here
today if the President’s name weren’t
Donald Trump. Democrats have been
calling for the U.S. to take action
against Iran until Donald Trump did
so.
Last month, Democrats sponsored
H.R. 7380, the IRAN Act, chastising the
Iranian regime for repeatedly shutting
down internet connectivity and impeding the Iranian people from communicating during emergencies and exercising
internationally
recognized
human rights.
Earlier this year, the Democrat-sponsored H.R. 5912, the DISRUPT Act,
would require the executive branch to
‘‘develop a whole-of-government strategy to disrupt growing cooperation
among the People’s Republic of China,
the Russian Federation, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which are
the foremost adversaries of the United
States, and mitigate the risks posed to
the United States.’’
This Democrat bill even states that
the partnering of these four U.S. adversaries ‘‘reinforces threats posed by
each such adversary individually.’’
It seems pretty clear to me that the
Democratic rhetoric has argued in

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.060

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026

favor of cracking down on the brutal
Iran regime—of course, until President
Trump was the one to initiate the regime’s demise.
President Trump has the duty to protect Americans and the United States’
interests both at home and abroad. The
administration engaged in earnest diplomacy to mitigate the Iranian
threat. It became crystal clear, however, that the Iranian regime used the
diplomatic process to buy itself time to
reconstitute its ballistic missile inventories and nuclear weapons program.
As the threat neared its apex, a point
beyond which mitigation would be impossible, President Trump lived up to
his duty as Commander in Chief and
took decisive action.
On March 2, President Trump notified Congress, consistent with the oftcriticized War Powers Resolution of
1973, of military action used to address
this threat to the American people and
American interests.
In other words, the President has
clearly acted consistent with precedent
and has prosecuted this military action
in a transparent and forthcoming manner, holding multiple press conferences
and sending his Cabinet officials and
operational experts to provide multiple
classified briefings on the status of the
ongoing conflict to all Members of Congress, as well as the appropriate committees and their staffs.
Mr. Speaker, passing the measure
today would do nothing to keep America safe. It would do nothing to
strengthen Congress. All it would do is
put America’s safety and all of its allies at risk. It would allow Iran to once
again rebuild its murderous regime and
terrorize the world.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote ‘‘no.’’ I thank Chairman MAST for
his partnership and leadership.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 21⁄2
minutes to the gentlewoman from Massachusetts (Ms. CLARK), the esteemed
whip of the Democratic Caucus.
Ms. CLARK of Massachusetts. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the gentleman from
New York (Mr. MEEKS) for yielding.
Donald Trump has taken America to
war without authorization, without explanation, and without a strategy or an
exit plan.
Six brave servicemembers have already given the ultimate sacrifice.
Others have been wounded, and Americans are stranded across the region.
What do we hear from our Commander
in Chief? He shrugs and says, ‘‘That is
the way it is’’ and how about that ballroom?
The American people do not want
their sons and daughters shipped to another war in the Middle East when
they don’t even know what the mission
is. They want a country where their
children can do better and reach higher
than their parents did, where they
don’t just survive but can actually get
ahead and where a doctor’s appointment is not a luxury.
What are they getting instead? Republicans have been raiding their

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:51 Mar 05, 2026

H2401

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

healthcare, their Social Security, and
their veterans benefits, all to enrich
the billionaire class. Illegal tariffs are
jacking up prices. Secret police are
murdering Americans in the streets. A
corrupt DOJ is covering for pedophiles
while denying their victims justice.
Today, you can stand with Americans who are entitled to know what the
objective of this war is and what the
cost will be. They deserve to know the
sacrifice will not fall just on working
and military families but will be
shared by the wealthy and powerful.
Today, you can join us in telling the
President that the Constitution is not
just a suggestion; that our country belongs to its people, to the American
people; that the power to declare war
belongs to the people’s Representatives; and that 250 years later, whatever Donald Trump may think, America still has no kings.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield 4
minutes to the gentleman from Alabama (Mr. ROGERS), the chairman of
the Armed Services Committee.
Mr. ROGERS of Alabama. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding.
I rise in strong opposition to this resolution.
The intelligence is clear that Iran
was attempting to rebuild its nuclear
program. Iran was developing missiles
that could place American bases in the
region and our homeland at risk.
The rapid expansion of Iranian missiles and drones posed an immediate
threat to U.S. forces and partners in
the region.
b 1610
Iran’s missile and drone arsenal
acted as a conventional shield to its
nuclear program. Faced with this
threat, the President sought diplomatic solutions, but the Iranian regime
refused to abandon their pursuit of a
nuclear weapon. They refused to limit
their ballistic missile arsenal, and they
refused to rein in their terrorist proxies.
Only when it became clear that Iran
would not agree to a peaceful resolution did President Trump take decisive
action and lawful action to protect the
American people.
As Secretaries Rubio and Hegseth
have repeatedly explained, this is a
limited military operation with clearly
defined objectives.
Those objectives are: Number one, to
destroy the Iranian missile drone and
defense infrastructure posing a threat
to U.S. forces and partners in the region; and, number two, to degrade
Iran’s industrial capacity to produce
additional drones and missiles; and,
number three, to destroy Iranian naval
assets with the capacity to threaten
U.S. forces and the free flow of commerce through the region.
Achieving these objectives will ensure Iran can no longer threaten the
U.S. or our allies.
Past administrations have allowed
the threat from Iran to grow and fester
to the problem we have now. President

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Trump took decisive action to end the
threat and restore the credibility of
American deterrence.
At this time, we should be focused on
ensuring our warfighters have the resources and capabilities they need to
succeed in this operation. We should
not pass any resolution that will end
this critical operation before achieving
these military objectives. Doing so
would needlessly risk the lives of
American servicemembers and American allies.
Mr. Speaker, I ask all Members to
pray for the safety of our men and
women in uniform and honor those who
have made the ultimate sacrifice. I
also urge my colleagues to oppose this
resolution.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 5
minutes to the gentleman from Kentucky (Mr. MASSIE), who is the sponsor
of this important resolution.
Mr. MASSIE. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman from New York for
yielding.
Mr. Speaker, James Madison wrote
to Thomas Jefferson in 1789: ‘‘The Constitution supposes, what the history of
all governments demonstrates, that
the executive is the branch of power
most interested in war, and most prone
to it. It has accordingly with studied
care vested the question of war in the
legislature.’’
The Constitution is clear. Article I,
Section 8, Clause 11 of our Constitution
provides Congress initiatory powers for
war.
Article II, Section 2, Clause 1 of our
Constitution gives the President operational powers of war to wage that war.
Even if this body were to pretend
that the 1973 War Powers Resolution
supersedes the clear language of the
Constitution, the President still has
not met the conditions required by
that law itself.
The 1973 War Powers Resolution
states plainly that the President may
only introduce U.S. Armed Forces into
hostilities pursuant to three conditions: one, a declaration of war; two,
specific statutory authorization; or,
three, a national emergency created by
an attack upon the United States.
None of those conditions exist today.
Iran has not attacked the United
States, Congress has not declared war,
and Congress has not granted specific
statutory authorization.
Beyond the constitutional question
here lies an even more important one:
Why are we going to war with Iran?
We owe our military servicemembers
a clear mission.
American families in my district
want to know: How is this going to
help them pay for groceries?
How does this make them any safer
in their schools or in their neighborhoods?
How does this help them pay for
housing?
Have we learned nothing from the
laundry list of wars and regime-change
experiments we sparked across the
Middle East that have racked up at

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.062

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2402

least $8 trillion in debt in Iraq, Libya,
Syria, and Afghanistan?
A sustained war with Iran will not
stabilize the region. It has already ignited the region. It will radicalize new
generations of terrorists, and it will
send more swarms of refugees into Europe and the United States.
Iran is not Venezuela. The ayatollah
was not a president. He was a religious
leader from a region notorious for radical Islamists, and the United States
and Israel turned him into a martyr. In
the process of doing so, we have already expended billions of dollars, and,
more solemnly, six American families
must now lay to rest their sons and
daughters.
For what?
This administration can’t even give
us a straight answer as to why we
launched this preemptive war. The
President says we had to strike first
because an Iranian strike was imminent. Meanwhile the Department of Defense conceded there was no evidence
of an imminent Iranian strike.
Some told us this war is about nuclear weapons, but 6 months ago, we
were assured our last strike on Iran
decimated their nuclear program.
So which is it?
I think the most candid answer came
from the Secretary of State who told
the press that Israel forced our hand
and dragged us into this war again.
That truth is the very reason why it is
Congress that must decide war.
If American lives are to be risked and
American blood is to be shed, that decision must be debated and voted on by
the Representatives and the American
people, and that debate is meant to be
arduous and long. That vote is meant
to be hard.
I have a theory. I think my colleagues don’t want to go on record because we have a terrible track record of
meddling in the Middle East. They
don’t want their name associated with
this when it doesn’t turn out well.
However, Congress cannot be bothered
with its constitutional duty because
for many in this Chamber it is easier to
simply allow someone else’s sons and
daughters to be sent to combat without
their vote.
To be clear, we aren’t even here to
declare war today. All we are voting on
is a War Powers Resolution to reassert
the Constitution, which is that Congress must decide questions of war, and
if Congress wants war, then the Speaker should hold a vote to declare it.
Some say Congress authorizes war
when we pay for it when we pass the
budget bill. Here is the problem: We
haven’t taken on the hard work of defining the mission for our sons and
daughters who are going to fight. That
is not in the budget bill. It never is.
To the men and women who are engaged in combat, I sincerely thank
you, and I pray for your safety. It is for
you that I wrote this resolution. It is
for you that all of us are here on this
floor working so hard to force this vote
so that you will have the clear mission

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:51 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

that you deserve and so that you will
know that when you achieve it, you
can come home.
Mr. Speaker, I urge support for this
resolution.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I urge not
supporting this resolution. I am thankful that my colleague at least started
to talk about that there is an Article II
authority. He actually discussed that.
When is something an emergency?
That is what a real debate can be. I
have laid out very clearly a number of
reasons why I believe it is a national
emergency and why I believe that
threat is imminent because of a number of things that have happened. My
colleagues over there say that something can’t be imminent if it has been
going on for years. To me that would
be the definition of imminent if it is
ongoing for years.
At least my colleague was willing to
have that debate, although I disagree
with him and urge not passing his legislation.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the
gentleman from New Jersey (Mr.
SMITH), who is the chairman of the
Subcommittee on Africa.
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey. Mr.
Speaker, I thank the distinguished gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, for far too long, Iran
has held the world hostage with its nuclear threats, unbridled violence and
hate, pervasive use of torture and rape,
and Nazi-like anti-Semitism.
Iran is the world’s worst state sponsor of terrorism. All diplomatic initiatives to secure peace, justice, and reconciliation with the Iranian dictatorship have been fruitless.
President Trump is a man of his
word, and he means it when he says
that Iran must never be permitted to
acquire a nuclear weapon. Despite
ample warnings and admonishments to
negotiate seriously, which it has never
done, Iran has defied U.S. diplomacy to
end its decades-long quest to procure
nuclear weapons and cease its despicable violence against Americans,
Israelis, and the Iranians themselves.
Among the many egregious concessions made in 2015 by President Obama
to the Iranians was to get a deal which
included removal of a treaty obligation
that would have ended Iran’s missile
program and prevent the production of
the ballistic missiles that are today
raining down on our American military
in the region, Israeli civilians, and our
friends in neighboring countries.
In debate on the House floor in 2015,
I stood right here and said: Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei
criticized the call for Iran to end its
ballistic missile program, characterizing it as a stupid and idiotic expectation, claiming that the Revolutionary
Guard should definitely carry out their
program and not be satisfied with the
present level of missiles.
Khamenei said that they should mass
produce those missiles, and mass
produce they have, killing thousands
and putting millions more at risk. It is

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

estimated that Iran produces 100 missiles each and every month.
I would remind my colleagues that
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action signed by China, France, Germany, Russia, the U.K., and, of course,
the United States, the P5+1, had a sunset date of October 18, 2025.
I remember asking for it during debate in committee and on the floor.
Sunset? Did anyone think that in
2015 that Iran would somehow matriculate from a brutal dictatorship to a democracy in those 10 years?
That provided the Iranians the incentive to wait us out because then everything would be lifted even in that
flawed deal.
b 1620
Let me also point out to my colleagues that the Trump administration
has refused—I say again ‘‘refused’’—to
have the United States bullied by Iran.
The distinguished chairman before
went through one instance after another where they have killed Americans. Even when they bombed us in
Lebanon, there was a young man in the
Marines from my district who was
killed in that brutal act of war by the
Iranian dictatorship.
I just say that I am against this resolution. May God bless and protect our
courageous servicemembers, as well as
the idea of soldiers who are fighting
this tyrannical Iranian dictatorship
with
incredible
courage,
professionalism, skill, and tenacity.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from California (Mr. KHANNA), the cosponsor of
this important resolution.
Mr. KHANNA. Mr. Speaker, the world
needs a new moral vision. America
needs a new vision.
We are seeing militarism erode the
soul of our Nation, leading to a regime
change war in Iran and utter human
devastation in Gaza.
Simply put, we have lost our way. We
are back to the law of the jungle,
where might makes right and where
the Middle East descends into a
Hobbesian war of all against all.
President Eisenhower warned that
every warship built, every bomb deployed, every missile launched is a hospital and school forgone. A world in
arms, he said, is stealing the hopes of
our children.
Today, this vote on Iran is not a procedural vote. It is a profoundly moral
vote. It is a vote to direct our resources toward healing our own people,
toward healthcare that saves lives, jobs
that restore dignity, and housing that
shelters families instead of raining destruction on other nations.
It is a vote to renew an America that
leads once more through diplomacy,
statesmanship, and principle, an America that strives to end cycles of violence rather than ignite them, an
America that cooperates with other nations rather than bullying them into
submission, an America committed to
confronting child poverty, the climate

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.064

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026

crisis, and illiteracy, to advance our
shared humanity, an America that is
respected in the world again.
The world needs an America that
finds its moral center, Mr. Speaker.
Let us rise to this historic challenge.
In this body, let us declare with courage and clarity that we reject this illegal and unjust war in Iran. Let us
choose moral renewal over further
moral decay.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, let me tell
you why not to trust what was just
said as the gentleman walks out. Here
is what he voted for: ‘‘Iran’s ongoing
nuclear escalation poses a serious
threat to the United States and its
partners.’’ That is literally what he
voted for. ‘‘Use all means necessary to
prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear
weapon.’’ To me, that seems pretty
damn imminent.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the
gentleman from Texas (Mr. SELF),
chairman of the Europe Subcommittee.
Mr. SELF. Mr. Speaker, I rise here in
response to my colleague from across
the aisle. I thought we were talking
about the War Powers Act and not the
Democrats’ social programs. That is
what I am going to do.
President Trump’s decision to strike
Iran is not starting a forever war. It is
ending a forever war. For half a century, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
cast a shadow over the Middle East and
trapped the region in a dark age. When
the regime chants ‘‘death to America,
death to Israel,’’ they mean it.
The Islamic Republic is responsible
for the deaths of hundreds, if not thousands, of Americans, thousands of
Israelis, and tens of thousands of their
own people, including up to 30,000 in
just the last few weeks. Iran has
slaughtered more Americans than any
other terrorist regime in the world,
and they will continue to kill Americans until they are stopped.
Iran is the number one sponsor of
terrorism in the world by nonstate actors, something that is not even contemplated by the War Powers Act. The
regime funds, trains, and equips countless Islamic terrorist groups, including
the Houthi rebels in Yemen, Hezbollah
in Lebanon, Hamas in Gaza, and many
others across Iraq, Syria, and elsewhere in the region. For years, Iran has
leveraged these terrorists to wage war
against and kill Americans and countless civilians throughout the region.
Just last weekend in my home State,
a gunman horrifically killed three innocent people and injured four others
in Austin, Texas, while reportedly
wearing a sweatshirt that read ‘‘Property of Allah’’ and a shirt with an Islamic Republic of Iran flag on it. While
law enforcement continues its investigation into a connection with the Islamic Republic, Americans must understand the enemy is within the gates.
The current regime in Iran is the
poster child for Islam and sharia law, a
culture of violence and domination
that is totally incompatible with individual freedoms, our Constitution, and
our heritage.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:51 Mar 05, 2026

H2403

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Islam is an existential threat to our
constitutional republic. By conducting
this joint operation with our partners
in the region to defend against tyranny, we are defending Western civilization.
Furthermore, the Iranian people have
overwhelmingly demonstrated a clear
will to overthrow and change the radical regime. Tens of thousands of civilians have sacrificed their lives as a testimony to this point. By giving the
green light to Epic Fury, President
Trump is giving the Iranian people a
fighting chance to alter the course of
history in the Middle East and the
world.
As the Article II branch, the President is undertaking his constitutional
duty as Commander in Chief to defend
the United States from a tyrannical,
murderous Islamic regime.
Finally, I would also like to note
that since the War Powers Act was enacted, every President, both Republican and Democrat, has agreed that
this law is unconstitutional.
Instead of airing personal grievances
with the President, the American people and our servicemembers would be
better off if Congress focused on reopening the Department of Homeland
Security to prevent attacks on American soil and support the President in
executing his Article II duty.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MOORE of North Carolina). The time of
the gentleman has expired.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Texas.
Mr. SELF. Mr. Speaker, while I agree
that this body should engage in discussions about the War Powers Act, this is
not the appropriate time. U.S. troops
are currently in harm’s way, and they
need to have our full-throated support,
full stop. I urge my colleagues to oppose this resolution.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Ohio
(Mr. DAVIDSON), an esteemed member
of the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
Mr. DAVIDSON. Mr. Speaker, my
name is WARREN DAVIDSON, and I love
this country with a soldier’s passion.
More than 30 years ago, I enlisted in
the infantry. My chain of command
later helped me earn an appointment
to the United States Military Academy
at West Point. I was commissioned as
an infantry officer, serving in the 75th
Ranger Regiment, the 101st Airborne,
Rakkasans, and The Old Guard.
Then and now, I swore an oath to
support and defend our Constitution
against all enemies, foreign and domestic.
Make no mistake, Iran is an enemy
of the United States. As our military
engages them, they do so justly. Unfortunately, they are not yet doing so
constitutionally, and that is why we
are here today.
For some, this debate will be about
whether we should even be fighting in
Iran. For me, the debate is more funda-

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

mental: Is the President of the United
States, regardless of the person holding
the office, empowered to do whatever
he wants? That is not what our Constitution says.
Is he empowered to do whatever he
wants for 60 or 90 days? That is not
what the War Powers Act says.
Is there any limit to executive authority whatsoever?
I rise in support of this War Powers
Resolution today because the moral
hazard posed by a government no
longer constrained by our Constitution
is a grave threat.
The threat to a government no
longer constrained by the plain meaning of words is not new for Democrats.
Recall that Democrats needed help answering: ‘‘What is a woman?’’ Unfortunately, Republicans now want to claim
they can’t answer: ‘‘What is a war?’’
This debate isn’t even new. Democratic President Harry Truman obstructed a vote on the Korean war, pretending it was, instead, a U.N. police
action. Republican Senator Taft from
Ohio insisted in vain that Congress
should not shirk its duty to vote on declaring war or at least to authorize the
conflict. Instead, Congress then, as it
has in the past, passively cut checks to
fund the war that they refused to authorize.
This dereliction of duty is commonly
mocked as an example of constitutional avoidance, and it contributed to
the passage of the War Powers Act.
b 1630
President Trump’s America First
message was supposed to be a rejection
of the globalist war machine whose
endless wars have left America less
free, less safe, and more burdened by
debt. On the other hand, President
Trump has been reluctant to embrace
war and has been incredibly successful
in diplomacy.
In this case, war may well be necessary, but it is far more pressing that
we restore a government small enough
to fit within the Constitution. We can
afford a government that small and no
other. America is a Republic, not an
empire.
Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to
honor their oath and support our Constitution. Vote ‘‘yes’’ on this resolution.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Michigan (Mr. HUIZENGA), chairman of the
Subcommittee on South and Central
Asia.
Mr. HUIZENGA. Mr. Speaker, I
thank Chairman MAST for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, my Republican friend
from Ohio knows I deeply respect him,
his service to our country, and his consistency, frankly. That is something
that we are not seeing from many of
my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle, and that is to be commended.
We have a different opinion on
whether this is legal or not. We all
know that the reason we are here is
that for nearly half a century, the Iranian regime has terrorized the globe

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.066

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2404

with acts of cowardly violence through
its own forces and proxy militias;
namely, Hamas, the Houthis, and
Hezbollah, whom they have provided
military, political, diplomatic, and
monetary aid.
They have killed approximately a
thousand Americans and maimed thousands of others, both Americans and
Arabs, with roadside bombs and other
IEDs. We have seen all the videos online with drones and missiles hurtling
into malls, hospitals, and hotels. This
has to stop.
During his first term, President
Trump imposed a maximum pressure
campaign in response to President
Obama’s lack of action regarding Iran,
and that crippled Iran’s ability to raise
revenues from its oil operations and
fund their terror network.
How do I know that, Mr. Speaker?
Because as a member of the Financial
Services Committee where all of those
sanctions originated, I worked on those
very sanctions.
However, years later, the Biden administration found those moves too far
and harsh on Iran and refused to enforce those sanctions. Sanctions are
only as good and useful as their willingness to enforce them.
During this period, Iranian crude production topped 3 million barrels a day,
greater by more than a factor of seven
during the maximum pressure campaign, allowing the Iranian regime to
continue to finance its brutality internationally and domestically.
Congress attempted to reverse course
by passing legislation to codify the
maximum pressure campaign measures. That is why the House of Representatives passed my bill, the No
U.S. Financing for Iran Act, by an
overwhelming bipartisan majority during the 118th Congress, to cut off the
Iranian regime from the U.S. financial
system. My friends who voted for that
seem to forget.
My colleagues on the other side of
the aisle tend to forget that the Iranian regime directed an assassination
attempt against the current President
of the United States. Whether you like
President Trump or not, no sitting
President should be allowed to be a target by a foreign country without consequences.
Peace through strength does not
mean another open-ended war of the
past. Operation Epic Fury is a defensive action using overwhelming force
to protect the American people from an
imminent and growing threat.
Additionally, it cannot be ignored
that Iran was producing conventional
drones and ballistic missiles at an
alarming rate, until just this past
weekend, and to provide a protective
layer of defense for its nuclear ambitions and nuclear weapons development.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Michigan.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

05:51 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

Mr. HUIZENGA. Mr. Speaker, the
Trump administration has clearly defined the mission, the objective, and
the timeline. He has notified and
briefed Congress on these operations.
Simply put, Iran cannot, under any circumstances, possess the capabilities
for having nuclear weapons.
The Biden administration’s official
policy toward Iran summed up in one
word: ‘‘Don’t.’’ That phrase underpinned one of the most ineffective foreign policy agendas in the 21st century.
Give me a break.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote against this resolution, hoping to
score political points by tying the
President’s hands in the face of danger.
It is time that we defend our liberty,
our freedom, our neighbors, and this
great Nation in the face of Iran’s systematic terror.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 1
minute to the gentlewoman from California (Ms. WATERS), the ranking member of the House Financial Services
Committee.
Ms. WATERS. Mr. Speaker, I am especially concerned about Iran’s stockpile of enhanced uranium, which could
be used at any time. I know that the
President has said that the nuclear capability of Iran had been obliterated.
However, prior to the first Trump administration, the U.S. was able to monitor the status of Iran’s uranium under
an agreement called the ‘‘Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,’’ the
JCPOA. The U.S. negotiated this agreement with Iran in 2015, but Trump
withdrew from the JCPOA in 2018. Now,
we have no way to track the status of
Iran’s dangerous uranium stockpile.
This war must be stopped.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
vote for the resolution.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I think the
last speaker just said she was worried
about Iran’s uranium stockpile and
that it could be used at any time. That
seems pretty damn imminent to me,
too.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the
gentleman from Florida (Mr. MILLS),
chairman of the Subcommittee on
Oversight and Intelligence.
Mr. MILLS. Mr. Speaker, the chairman is right. We just pointed to the
three key things that you need in order
to have lethal force against the United
States. One is intent.
I think that Iran and the regime have
made it very clear when they are
chanting ‘‘death to America,’’ the
thousands of lives they have changed
with either maiming or killing American troops or civilians abroad, but
also likelihood.
We know that they are able to build
100-plus missiles a day. We know they
had ICBMs. We have now found out
they had the hypersonic ballistic capabilities as they targeted over six different countries.
The thing we talk about, the JCPOA,
as was just mentioned, Resolution 2231
where the administration tried to come
up with an idea of a negotiation that

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

led to diplomatic and peaceful solutions, was continually violated by this
regime as even Secretary-Generals Ban
Ki-moon and Guterres had pointed out
multiple times as the Iranian regime
sent mid-range ballistic missiles to the
Houthis and to other areas to continue
attacking Americans and the West.
The hypocrisy is what I really want
to point out here, not the fact that we
already understand the Article II authorities that the President has, which
is well within the bounds constitutionally, not to mention the fact that
this body, before I came into Congress,
was already abdicating the roles and
responsibilities under Article I, Section 8, Clause 11 when they started
doing things like AUMFs.
Let us point to things like what we
saw in Libya. It was very clear in 2011,
as we see here in military intervention,
that it was without prior congressional
authorization, relying instead on a
U.N. Security Council resolution and
legal justification from the Department of Justice that argued that the
administration had limited nonground
troop missions and doesn’t constitute
hostilities. Mr. Speaker, that is exactly
what we have here: no ground troops.
It also goes on further to justify
under the United Nations mandates,
international mandates, and the legal
justification to say that because they
were focused on protecting civilians,
not sustained fighting and didn’t involve ground troops. I don’t know
about you, but I think 40-plus Iranian
civilians, peacefully protesting for a
change, being brutally murdered, being
raped, being tortured, being slaughtered, being hung from cranes, being
persecuted and imprisoned—I think
President Trump stopping this after 47
years was protecting civilian lives.
I think it is established that we had
no boots on the ground. I think that we
have demonstrated the imminence, the
likelihood, and intent of an evil regime
to try and go ahead and attack Americans and threaten our way of life.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, the gentleman about to speak on the other
side, Mr. RASKIN, also voted to say
Iran’s ongoing nuclear escalation poses
a serious threat to the United States
and its partners and to use all means
necessary to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. He must have
thought it was pretty damn imminent,
too.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
b 1640
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. RASKIN), the ranking member
of the House Judiciary Committee.
Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the ranking member for yielding time.
Mr. Speaker, yes, use all lawful and
constitutional means. I heard one of
our colleagues across the aisle just say:
Well, yes, Article I, Section 8, Clause 11
does give Congress the exclusive, plenary, comprehensive power to declare

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.068

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026

war and not the President, and we
could be debating it, but the President
has already taken us to war, so it is too
late. It would undermine the cause for
us to debate it.
What a humiliating, self-defeating
argument for a Member of the Article I
branch of Congress to make. Don’t my
colleagues understand that destroys
our power to declare war if any President can plunge us into a war and
thereby defeat our exclusive, plenary
power over it?
The Framers weren’t fooling around
when they did that. They knew that
the kings were constantly plunging
their people into wars of deception,
conceit, plunder, imperial avarice, and
fantasy. The kings were constantly
doing that. They didn’t want to leave
it up to one person to decide whether
to send a whole country to war and to
put our sons and daughters at risk.
That is an awesome and solemn responsibility that must be vested in the
Representatives of the people, all the
people, which is why both the House
and the Senate are involved in it.
Whether my colleagues think this
war is the most brilliant and strategic
breakthrough and moral cause since
World War II, or they think it is an absolute strategic blunder built on lies
like the last wars in Iraq or the war in
Afghanistan, which cost thousands of
lives and more than $1 trillion, wherever my colleagues are on that policy
question, can we not agree as Members
of the Article I branch that it is up to
us? We have to vote on it. We have to
debate on it.
I am hearing very interesting and
good arguments all over this spectrum
on this. That is why it is reposed in the
Representatives of the people to decide
it. It is not Donald Trump, not JD
VANCE, not Tulsi Gabbard, or anybody
else in the executive branch. It is our
decision. Everybody should vote ‘‘yes’’
on this resolution.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I have heard it brought
up many times that we get to vote to
declare war. We do, but it is enshrined
in the Constitution that the President
gets to defend the United States of
America because of national emergencies.
These kinds of emergencies that the
last gentleman voted to say to ‘‘use all
means necessary to prevent Iran from
obtaining a nuclear weapon,’’ that
seems like an emergency to me.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the
gentleman from New York (Mr.
LAWLER), the chairman of the Middle
East and North Africa Subcommittee.
Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, this past
weekend, President Trump launched
military operations against the terrorist Iranian regime, alongside our
ally, Israel, killing the Ayatollah and
many of his top lieutenants in the
IRGC and the council of clerics.
This operation came after almost a
year of negotiations to reach a diplomatic solution to end Iran’s nuclear

VerDate Sep 11 2014

05:51 Mar 05, 2026

H2405

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

ambitions, ballistic missiles program,
and funding of terrorism. Time and
again, we were left emptyhanded because of the regime’s unwillingness to
honestly negotiate in good faith.
After exhausting all potential diplomatic means, only then did the President initiate Operation Epic Fury.
It is also important to point out that
this engagement is not a new war. The
Iranian regime has been at war with
America for 47 years.
They have been attacking Americans, our military, our allies, and our
partners. They advocate for death to
America. They hate us. They hate
America. They hate Israel. They hate
Europe. They hate the West. They massacre their own people for simple public dissent and peaceful protest.
They
send
money
to
Hamas,
Hezbollah, the Houthis, and other terror proxies around the world with the
express interest of killing Americans
and Israelis. They funded the October 7
terrorist attack that murdered and
kidnapped not just Israelis but Americans. The Ayatollah and his conspirators paid the ultimate price.
This is the maximum pressure campaign President Trump advocated for.
This is how we secure our national security so that Americans can be free
and safe and our allies in the Middle
East can be free and safe.
The long-term strategic benefits here
in regard to peace and stability are immense. The only way to ensure peace
and economic prosperity in the Middle
East is to eliminate the single greatest
threat to it.
As far as the War Powers Act goes,
the President is fully compliant. Congress was notified. Congress was
briefed. The fact is that the President
has 60 to 90 days to conduct this operation. If Congress sees fit at that time,
we will address it.
Mr. Speaker, to try to unilaterally
end this operation puts our national security at risk, puts our troops at risk,
and puts our allies at risk.
Iran is belligerently striking Arab
partners as we speak. They are hitting
civilian sites and trying to kill American soldiers. In fact, they have killed
six.
Many of my colleagues said nothing
when Barack Obama engaged in a 7month campaign in Libya. In fact,
when a War Powers Resolution was on
this floor, many opposed it, including
CHUCK SCHUMER, the Senate minority
leader.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
MEUSER). The time of the gentleman
has expired.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from New York.
Mr. LAWLER. Mr. Speaker, the fact
is that when we look back, Presidents
of both parties have acted under Article II and without the express authorization of Congress.
Former Speaker NANCY PELOSI said it
best when she said that Barack Obama
could conduct the operation in Libya

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

for 7 months and did not require congressional authority.
Stop being hyperpartisan hypocrites
and acknowledge the simple fact that
the President is legally justified. Vote
‘‘no’’ on this War Powers Resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to direct their comments to the Chair.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Connecticut (Mr. HIMES), the ranking
member of the House Intelligence Committee.
Mr. HIMES. Mr. Speaker, I thank the
chairman for the recognition.
Mr. Speaker, I have been listening
closely to this debate since it began.
The arguments being made by half of
the Representatives of the people of
the United States, the arguments as to
why they should abrogate their constitutionally mandated duty, are bizarre to me.
Most of the arguments have not been
arguments. The arguments are that
Iran is evil, that they hate the U.S.,
and that they mean us ill. The majority will find no argument over here
that that is true.
Oddly enough, when the Founders
wrote the Constitution, they didn’t say
we shall declare war only when it is
not clear that the belligerent is evil or
means us ill. It was a categorical demand that the Representatives of the
people, because blood and treasure
would be consumed, that the Representatives of the people not just be
informed but that they provide authorization.
I have heard the majority say that
the danger was imminent. I am the
ranking member of the Intelligence
Committee. I can say with authority
that, in the last 10 years, Iran’s ability
to create mayhem, while still very substantial, is at an ebb.
The President himself said the nuclear capabilities were ‘‘obliterated,’’
his word. Hezbollah has been largely
rolled up in Beirut by the Lebanese
Armed Forces. We have a pretty good
sense of what the Houthis are capable
of and how to counter them. If the argument is imminence, that is absurd.
There was no imminent threat to the
United States on Friday or Saturday of
last week.
By the way, the argument that my
friend from New York just made, which
is that Obama did it, is beyond absurd.
I wasn’t here when Obama did it. We
weren’t asked to vote on it. I remember
telling the Vice President at the time
that our Constitution demands congressional assent.
Congress was not notified. It was not
briefed. That doesn’t matter. What
matters is that the Constitution is
clear that, with six dead Americans,
with our treasure being consumed, we
must approve this action.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Connecticut.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.070

H04MRPT1

H2406

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

Mr. HIMES. Mr. Speaker, it is not
about informing.
By the way, this Congress was not informed. Mr. Speaker, eight Members of
this Congress were informed.
Set aside, if you will, for a moment
the Constitution. Should the Representatives of the people authorize an
action that will kill many of those people and that will consume blood and
treasure? Our Framers certainly said
the answer to that question is yes.
Mr. Speaker, let’s not abrogate our
constitutional duty or our constitutional power. Vote ‘‘yes’’ on this resolution.
b 1650
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, let’s poke a few holes in
the Intelligence Committee ranking
member’s story here.
‘‘At an ebb.’’ They have been knocking jets off of our aircraft carriers.
They have been attacking in places
like Syria and Iraq. They killed three
U.S. servicemembers at Tower 22 in
Jordan, but he can say that it is at an
ebb.
Let’s poke one more hole in this. As
ranking member of the Intelligence
Committee, he did not vote to say that
Iran’s ongoing nuclear escalation poses
a serious threat to the United States
and its partners. That seems like an
odd thing that the ranking member of
the Intelligence Committee wouldn’t
vote for.
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from Kentucky (Mr. BARR).
Mr. BARR. Mr. Speaker, I thank the
chairman for yielding me time.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in strong opposition to this dangerous and misguided
War Powers Resolution that would
weaken our country and serve as a gift
to our enemies.
The radical terrorist regime in
Tehran, the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism, has targeted and
killed thousands of Americans since
1979. The United States, Israel, and all
of our allies are safer because the Ayatollah is dead.
Since the taking of our hostages
from our embassy in 1979 to the infamous 1983 Beirut barracks bombing
that killed 241 U.S. Marines, to the attack on the USS Cole that left 37 Navy
sailors dead, to the maiming and killing of thousands of U.S. military members during the global war on terrorism, the Iranian terrorist regime
has always posed a grievous threat to
the United States. Operation Epic Fury
is neutralizing that threat, and it has
been a tremendous success.
President Trump promised that Iran
can never obtain a nuclear weapon. He
is acting on that promise to make the
world a safer place, and he is complying with the law in doing so, not
just in complying with the notification
requirements of the War Powers Resolution, not only through the consultation provisions, and not only with rou-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:52 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

tinely updating Congress, but also
under the Commander in Chief powers.
As a legal matter, the President of
the United States doesn’t need the permission of Congress to engage in hostilities to protect the American people.
The Commander in Chief Clause gives
the President the exclusive power to
command the military in operations
approved by Congress, and it also gives
the President substantial independent
power to direct military operations, so
long as the President does not infringe
on the exclusive powers of Congress.
What are the exclusive powers of
Congress? The declaration power—we
have been silent on that—and appropriations, the power of the purse. This
Congress has appropriated funds to defend the country, and we increased appropriations through the reconciliation
bill this year.
The NDAA is the policy of this Congress, which identifies Iran as a threat
to our country. The Constitution was
clear that Congress has the sole authority to declare war, which changes
the legal status of the country. Yet,
the Framers did not think that the language meant that the President and
Congress have to work together all of
the time to turn the keys of the war
power.
The Founders were practical men.
They understood that Congress is slow
to act, and Alexander Hamilton argued
in Federalist 70 that energy in the executive is essential for national security, unity, secrecy, dispatch, and decision, and he contended that a single
President is vital for defending the
country.
Mr. Speaker, Congress’ real power is
not just the declaration power. It is the
power of the purse. If my friends want
to constrain the President, they have
the authority to do it through the appropriations process. They do not have
the constitutional authority to constrain the President from defending
this country and defending our national security, advancing our national
security, and ridding the world of this
menace.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from California (Ms. JACOBS), the House Foreign
Affairs Committee ranking member on
the Africa Subcommittee.
Ms. JACOBS. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the ranking member for yielding me
time.
Mr. Speaker, I rise today as a voice
for my generation and for my community in San Diego, the biggest military
community in our country.
When Presidents from both sides of
the aisle have taken military action, it
is our servicemembers, our young people, who are sent into harm’s way.
They sacrifice their bodies, their mental health, their time with their loved
ones, and even their lives for us.
While they are willing to make those
sacrifices, we in Congress should be
damned sure it is worth it. Too often,
it is not. Too often, wars last longer
and cost more than promised. Too

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

often, regime-change plans go awry,
like we have already seen with the
deaths of six servicemembers, hundreds
of civilian deaths, and rising gas prices.
My colleagues will try to claim that
voting for this War Powers Resolution
hurts our servicemembers, but the opposite is true. We owe our servicemembers a real debate before we send them
into harm’s way. Voting ‘‘yes’’ is a
vote for our military to ensure that
their sacrifices won’t be in vain.
If any of my colleagues vote ‘‘no,’’
they should come to my district, look
our servicemembers in the eye, and explain why they believe debating before
we risk their lives is a bad thing.
I hope every single one of my colleagues votes ‘‘yes’’ on this War Powers Resolution for our servicemembers.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased
to yield 2 minutes to the gentleman
from Washington (Mr. BAUMGARTNER).
Mr. BAUMGARTNER. Mr. Speaker,
the Iranian terrorist regime has been
at war with the American people for
nearly 50 years through countless terrorist attacks, countless American
servicemen and -women injured, and a
persistent danger to the United States
of America. President Trump’s actions
are a long time coming, well-meaning,
and well-deserved.
I had the opportunity and the privilege to serve with the United States
State Department during the Iraq
surge, where I participated in putting
together a joint U.S.-Iraqi interagency
team to suppress Iranian-backed militia groups in Baghdad. These were
very, very bad guys.
One of the things that they did was
use what is called an explosively form
penetrator. Al-Qaida and the Sunni
groups would bake a lot of explosives
on their roof and make big bombs.
What the Iranians would do was make
a special kind of bomb with a copper
plate that would get an explosive, and
it could punch right through our
armor.
One day, on a trip to Sadr City, I
watched a massive what is called an
MRAP, armored personnel carrier, explode in front of me from an Iranian
bomb and watched as that hulking
metal burned to a crisp as American
servicemen and -women sought to deal
with the aftermath.
This terrorist regime has killed thousands of their countrymen and killed
Americans across the Middle East, and
it is time for them to come to an end.
This is a partisan political maneuver
by the Democrats, and they should be
ashamed for what they are doing to put
our servicemen and -women in danger.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I remind
the gentleman that this is a Massie
bill.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the
gentleman from New York (Mr. NADLER).
Mr. NADLER. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
strong support of this resolution and
reasserting Congress’ constitutional responsibility.
As the gentleman from Florida stated, the President has the power to

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.071

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

react to an attack on the United
States. He does not have the power to
start a war.
President Trump’s illegal strikes
against Iran are dragging the United
States into another costly war in the
Middle East.
To be clear, I shed no tears over the
Ayatollah’s death. His brutality was
responsible for the deaths of scores of
his own people, and he directed terrorist proxies around the world. Yet,
his removal is unlikely to bring about
the revolution and regime change that
the President seeks.
We had a diplomatic agreement with
Iran that did contain their nuclear
threat with constant verification, but
President Trump tore up that agreement.
This unnecessary attack is a clear
violation of the Constitution. Kings
often plunged their nations into wars
for plunder or avarice. The Constitution gave the power to decide on war or
peace to Congress so that no President
could act as a king.
That is precisely what the President
is doing. We must pass this resolution
to chastise President Trump and to reassert what the Constitution provides:
that only Congress can decide to commit this Nation to war.
I urge Members to vote ‘‘yes.’’
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, may I inquire as to how much time is remaining.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gentleman from Florida has 15 minutes remaining. The gentleman from New
York has 21 minutes remaining.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased
to yield 2 minutes to the gentleman
from Florida (Mr. FINE).
Mr. FINE. Mr. Speaker, I believe in
symbolic things at times. It was 47
years ago that Iran began chanting
‘‘Death to America.’’ I don’t think it is
symbolic that the 47th President of the
United States is the first to do something about it, but only one number
away from that is 46. That is the number of Americans that, thanks to Iran,
were killed on October 7, 2023.
b 1700
I don’t think Iran had a meeting
where they debated whether they
should support Hamas to go and do
that attack. They did it, and now
America is in the position that we are
in.
There was a press conference not too
long ago where the Speaker was asked:
You are saying that the President did
not need authorization initially and
still does not need any authorization
from Congress? The Speaker of the
House answered that question: Yes.
That was NANCY PELOSI when asked
about an attack on Libya.
President Trump is doing exactly
what he is authorized to do: protecting
the United States by making sure a

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:52 Mar 05, 2026

H2407

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

terrorist regime cannot attack us
using nuclear weapons.
While there may be some who want
to wait until America is nuked to have
that discussion, I am not one of them.
I support the President. I support his
judgment. He has not let us down. He
has defined the mission in clear, compelling, and concise ways to make sure
they don’t get nukes, to make sure
they can’t develop intercontinental
ballistic missiles, and to make sure
they don’t have a military shield to
support them as they do that.
I don’t have to have a debate before
he does that sort of thing. That is what
our Framers intended.
The fact of the matter is I wouldn’t
trust some of the people in this room
to have that debate if we wanted to put
handcuffs around him before he did
that.
The President is doing the right
thing. Congress should stand by him.
Congress should trust Trump because
he is not letting us down, and he won’t
let us down.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Texas
(Mr. CASTRO), the House Committee on
Foreign Affairs’ ranking member on
the Subcommittee on the Western
Hemisphere.
Mr. CASTRO of Texas. Mr. Speaker,
Americans do not want and cannot afford another war in the Middle East.
On Saturday morning, Americans
woke up to the shocking news that our
Nation was at war again in the Middle
East. There was no public justification,
no vote to authorize this war in Congress.
Why this war? Why now?
If they say it is about Iran developing a nuclear weapon, just last year,
President Trump claimed Iran’s nuclear program had been completely and
totally obliterated. In fact, Iran is further from perfecting a nuclear weapon
now than it has been in years.
Some claim it is to disable air ballistic missile capability, but Iran
doesn’t have a single ballistic missile
that can reach the mainland United
States, and we don’t expect them to for
many years.
Is this about terrorism? It is true
that Iran has helped finance and supply
groups like Hamas and Hezbollah over
the years, but they too are much weaker, much less capable after 2 years of
conflict.
Why now? Well, Secretary Rubio told
us himself. He said that Israel was
going to strike Iran, which would have
triggered Iranian strikes on U.S. forces
in the region.
Rather than pick up the phone and
tell Benjamin Netanyahu to stand
down, the President of the United
States buckled and decided to join
their war.
How is this America First?
For 25 years, a generation of American servicemembers and their families
have sacrificed so much because of regime-change wars in the Middle East.
President Trump is now asking yet an-

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

other generation of Americans to sacrifice in the hope that this time it will
go differently than Iraq, Afghanistan,
or Libya.
This is Donald Trump’s war. This is
Benjamin Netanyahu’s war. Your vote
today will determine whether this is
your war, too.
Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to
support this resolution.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from New
Jersey (Mr. VAN DREW).
Mr. VAN DREW. Mr. Speaker, let us
be clear about what is happening right
now. The United States is confronting
a regime that has spent decades chanting ‘‘Death to America;’’ a regime
whose proxies like Hezbollah, Hamas,
and the Houthis, just to name a few,
have been responsible for the deaths of
hundreds and hundreds of American
troops; a regime that is working relentlessly toward a nuclear weapon.
A nuclear-armed Iran would not just
threaten the Middle East. It would
threaten the entire world and, yes, civilization as we know it.
Now, at the very moment when decisive action is being taken to dismantle
a threat, this resolution would tie the
hands of the President of the United
States. Congress should not allow this
to happen. Congress cannot allow this
to happen.
Decisive action against the Iranian
regime is about protecting America
and about protecting Americans. It is
about protecting our troops stationed
across the Middle East. It is about protecting our citizens abroad and our allies in the region.
Iran cannot have a nuclear weapon.
For too long, the Iranian regime has
acted with impunity as it murders its
own people, tortures its own people,
and destroys its own people. There is
simply no justification for allowing
this regime and its leaders to continue
to exist.
America will not wait to be hit first
and will not gamble with American
lives. America will not allow the
world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism to obtain the most dangerous
weapon on the face of the Earth.
For that reason, I urge my colleagues
to vote ‘‘no’’ on this resolution.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentlewoman from Arizona (Ms. ANSARI).
Ms. ANSARI. Mr. Speaker, the Islamic Republic is a barbaric, corrupt
regime that has murdered, imprisoned,
and terrorized its own people for decades.
As the daughter of Iranian immigrants who fled this regime, I know
personally what its violence means.
Members of my family and friends have
been brutalized and murdered by the
Islamic Republic. My grandfather was
imprisoned by the regime, and my family member was beheaded by them. The
horror stories go on.
Let me be very clear: I have spent my
entire life opposing the Islamic Republic and its brutality, and I celebrate

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.073

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2408

the death of Supreme Leader Ali
Khamenei.
At the same time, as an American
Congresswoman, who swore an oath to
the United States Constitution, I am
deeply concerned by President Trump’s
decision to launch an illegal war—because it is, in fact, illegal—against Iran
without congressional authorization
and without presenting a clear plan to
the American people.
War carries profound and deadly consequences for our troops, for the American people, and for the entire world. It
is the most serious decision that a nation can make. The American people
deserve debate, transparency, and accountability before that decision is
made.
The Constitution is clear: the power
to declare war rests with Congress. I
want nothing more than a free Iran and
safety and security for innocent Iranians. That requires more than force.
It requires seriousness, accountability,
and a real plan to support the Iranian
people in determining their own future.
Donald Trump has shown at every instance that freedom for the people of
Iran is not his priority. Every few
hours the administration jumps to a
new justification or objective for this
war, but never is a democratic transition and self-determination for Iranians a part of the discussion. This was
echoed last night by senior administration officials at the briefing to Members of Congress.
Ultimately, this vote is about the legitimacy of our democracy and our
Constitution, and that is why I will be
voting ‘‘yes’’ on the War Powers Resolution.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, before I reserve again, I would just invite the previous speaker to explain. If Iran posed
an emergency, an existential threat to
America, I would be happy to hear it.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 11⁄2
minutes to the gentlewoman from Minnesota (Ms. OMAR).
Ms. OMAR. Mr. Speaker, I rise today
to support this resolution.
Donald Trump is unilaterally dragging this Nation into an illegal and unjustified war with Iran.
As someone who has survived the
horrors of war, I know that bombs do
not build peace or create stability.
Military strikes will not make us safer.
They will inflame tensions and push
the region further into chaos.
Every time people abandon diplomacy, they choose destruction. Congress knows who will bear the cost of
this decision: innocent civilians caught
in the crossfire and young servicemembers sent into harm’s way.
The American people are exhausted
by endless wars built on false promises
and paid for with American and foreign
lives.
Congress must reassert its constitutional authority. I urge my colleagues
to vote ‘‘yes’’ to stop U.S. involvement
in another illegal forever war.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:52 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

b 1710
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I heard the
same comments about Venezuela.
There has been no forever war there,
and that did bring peace and stability
to the Venezuelan people. I guess we
are proving the previous comments
wrong.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the
gentleman from Ohio (Mr. MILLER).
Mr. MILLER of Ohio. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today in strong opposition to this
resolution.
Directing President Trump to withdraw combat operations in Iran is not
only foolish, but it is dangerous. Pulling back now will solidify the regime’s
brutal grip on the great people of Iran
and put American troops in grave danger.
My colleagues on the other side of
the aisle are claiming we must pass
this resolution because President
Trump acted without an imminent
threat to U.S. forces in the region. Are
we serious? No imminent threat?
Iran and its proxies have been soaking themselves in American blood for
nearly 50 years. Are we to believe that,
one, their ballistic missile program is
not dangerous; two, their nuclear program is not anything; or, three, their
vast proxy network of terrorists all
over the world is not an imminent
threat to U.S. forces?
Our veterans know the answer to
that question. They, unlike most of us,
have been fighting Iran well before the
start of Operation Epic Fury. They
have been under imminent threat for
decades. Attack after attack, Iran and
its proxies have seldom passed up an
opportunity to kill Americans, and the
other side of the aisle knows it.
The President is well within his Article II authorities to defend U.S. forces
from needless bloodshed. To do so,
Iran’s offensive military capabilities
must be destroyed.
This is not a war of choice. This is an
intervention to prevent a future fullscale war in the Middle East that we
must avoid.
President Trump knows this and so
do my colleagues on the other side. The
difference is that President Trump has
the foresight to make this difficult but
prudent decision.
As we debate in this Chamber, our
military is quickly dismantling the
Iranian threat. When this is all over
soon, we will be much safer for it.
God bless and protect our Armed
Forces, and our prayers are with the
fallen and their families. We are able
to stand here today because of generations of their sacrifice. Semper Fidelis.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Massachusetts (Mr. MCGOVERN), the ranking
member of the House Rules Committee.
Mr. MCGOVERN. Mr. Speaker, nobody is defending the Ayatollah. There
is no love lost for a brutal government
that sponsors terror and murders their
people.
Iran has been doing this for decades.
Everybody knows that. So my question

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

is this: Why wasn’t Donald Trump in
favor of regime change until this weekend? Why did he campaign on swearing
he would never send American kids to
fight and die in the Middle East?
Republicans can’t answer because
they were against war with Iran until
exactly the second Donald Trump decided to go to war. Now, they are all
running around sounding like neocon
lunatics.
America can’t take this level of
gaslighting.
I went to the classified briefing.
There was no imminent threat, I guess
unless Republicans want to redefine
the word ‘‘imminent’’ to mean stretching back 47 years.
This whole thing is just so transparently built on lies. Republicans
went from imminent threat to regime
change to nukes back to imminent
threat in the last 24 hours.
I will tell you what this is, Mr.
Speaker. This is Iraq 2.0. I still remember the lies about WMDs. I voted
against that war, too. At least George
Bush had the decency to lie to people’s
faces.
By the way, no congressional vote
can legitimize this because there was
no imminent threat. There was no U.N.
Security Council resolution. This war
is illegal, no matter what you want to
call it.
It is not Donald Trump’s kids that
will have to fight and die for their
draft-dodging dad. It is not the children of the billionaire Epstein class. It
is working-class kids who are going to
put their lives on the line.
Shame on Republicans. I am sick of
this bs. We are spending billions of dollars a day on a war, and we can’t even
get Republicans to join us to expand
healthcare in America.
How the hell is this America First?
You guys broke your top campaign
promise. Good luck with that. I hope
the defense contractor money was
worth it. Shame on you all. The mask
is off. You are all just a bunch of pathetic neocon warmongers.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. MILLER of Ohio). Members are reminded to
refrain from engaging in personalities
toward the President.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3
minutes to the gentleman from California (Mr. ISSA), vice chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee.
Mr. ISSA. Mr. Speaker, before I
begin, in addition to the disparaging of
the President, the previous speaker implied that this was about money from
defense contractors. Shame on anyone
who would say that.
I was a first lieutenant about to be a
captain when the war was declared
against us 47 years ago. Iran has been
at war with us and the world for 47
years.
In 1982, I was a young captain when
they killed 220 marines with their
bombs and their proxies in Lebanon.
Should we say, in fact, this is not defense of America against a country
that every day for 47 years has said

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.075

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026

that we are the evil ones and must be
destroyed? First of all, the right to defend, going back to Thomas Jefferson,
has not been a question of the Constitution. It has been an obligation of
the President.
To invoke the War Powers Act as
though this is not defense and then to
imply that there is any purpose other
than to recognize that this pervasive
threat that has killed Americans and
others around the world decade after
decade was getting stronger and
stronger?
Even though I hear that there was no
U.N., no this or that, I have visited
Ukraine, where their assembled parts
are
killing
Americans,
Russians,
Ukrainians, anyone they want because
they are an exporter of terror.
The fact is, around the world, we are
at war with the country of Iran. In my
ancestral country of Lebanon, today,
their proxies are firing on Israel in support of their hatred of the little Satan,
we being the big Satan.
Am I defending the actions of the
President? You betcha. I have defended
it for my entire quarter of a century
here, regardless of the party.
The only thing I can’t defend is the
idea that we have placated and empowered Iran time and time again, so that
today the job is harder and longer than
it otherwise would be.
Lastly, there is no question that if
we withdraw or cease at this time, we
are saying to the next Ayatollah, the
next Supreme Leader, that, in fact, the
United States will not see this
through. We will be empowering them
to spread their terror, to have more
American blood on their hands as a result.
Mr. Speaker, I urge ‘‘no’’ on this resolution because it is not only unconstitutional, but it is also ill-advised at a
time in which we are defending America.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I would
point out that the next speaker as well,
it would appear, voted to say: ‘‘Use all
means necessary to prevent Iran from
obtaining a nuclear weapon.’’ He clearly thought that there was a pretty
damn imminent threat going on there,
but I look forward to hearing the remarks.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I thought
the President would follow the Constitution.
I yield 11⁄2 minutes to the gentleman
from Pennsylvania (Mr. DELUZIO).
Mr. DELUZIO. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman from New York.
I support the bipartisan War Powers
Resolution. We find ourselves, once
again, in a foolish regime change war,
much like the one that my generation
was sent to serve in Iraq that cost
thousands of lives and a trillion-plus
dollars.
I have heard lots of justifications on
the other side for why this, number
one, isn’t a war while I heard the gentleman from New York call it a war.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

06:52 Mar 05, 2026

H2409

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

That is what it is. The Defense Secretary has called it a war. That is what
this is.
I have seen pointing to different authorities here and there, between the
laws, that might justify this.
Congress has not declared war. Congress has not provided a statutory Authorization for Use of Military Force.
The third condition of the War Powers
Resolution that could allow the President to do such a thing is that the
United States is under attack. We, of
course, were not under attack when the
President started this war that we
don’t need to fight today.
That is the War Powers Resolution.
Those are the three bases that a President can use force under the War Powers Resolution.
Let’s not forget that the American
people want life to be less of a rip-off
here at home. They want healthcare
they can afford and housing. I can go
on and on.
What they don’t want is Americans
coming back in flag-draped caskets and
billions of dollars spent overseas.
b 1720
Today I asked the Trump administration officials for the cost of this war.
They can’t answer the question. Those
are the basic things you have to know
before you send Americans to fight,
Mr. Speaker.
We should support this resolution
and put a stop to this now.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. MEUSER).
Mr. MEUSER. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the chairman for his leadership, service, and sacrifice.
Mr. Speaker, I rise in opposition to
H. Con. Res. 38 which would limit the
President’s ability to protect the
American people from Iran’s terrorist
regime. I believe that this resolution—
and maybe misunderstood—sends a
troubling message to our troops and a
perhaps interpreted welcome message
to our enemy.
The War Powers Act is very clear.
Enacted in 1973, it requires the President to notify Congress within 48 hours
of deploying forces, and the President
has 60 days before he must seek congressional approval.
President Trump has clearly acted
within the provisions of the War Powers Act. President Obama, on the other
hand, used these authorities to launch
operations in Libya for over 7 months,
Iraq, Syria, and Yemen. President
Biden invoked the same authorities for
strikes against threats in Syria, Iraq,
and Yemen. Yet no resolution to limit
those Presidents was brought up in this
House by our colleagues.
As Secretary Rubio said, and he described in great detail, there was an
imminent threat upon the United
States and our allies from Iran.
Speaker JOHNSON also warned: The
idea that Congress would now take
away the ability of the Commander in
Chief is dangerous and is a threat to

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

the safety of the United States of
America.
We must remember whom we are
dealing with. We are dealing with Iran,
which has been a terrorist state for 47
years. Its proxies range from Hezbollah
to Hamas to the Houthis, and the list
goes on. Directly and through these
proxies, Iran has maimed and killed
thousands of Americans. They orchestrated the massacre in Israel on October 7. We know this.
They are, in fact, doing their utmost
to continue enriching uranium to make
it weapons grade. According to Special
Envoy Witkoff, just the other day, the
Iranian negotiators opened negotiations by bragging about presently controlling 460 kilograms of uranium enriched to 60 percent, enough weaponsgrade material for 11 bombs within 4 to
6 weeks.
Because of this regime’s reign of terror, their own civilians rose up and
protested, Mr. Speaker. Over the last 2
months, there are reports that as many
as 90,000 Iranian civilians were murdered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr.
GILL of Texas). The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from Pennsylvania.
Mr. MEUSER. Mr. Speaker, President Trump has strategically developed regional trust throughout the
Middle East. This is why we have a
strong coalition in this region to confront this threat. Today, Iran is an island thanks to the strategy of the
Trump administration.
The Iran of the past, one that oppresses and commits terrorism and all
kinds of atrocities on its own people
and the world, is history.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2
minutes to the gentleman from Texas
(Mr. DOGGETT).
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Speaker, from
his first day in public office, President
Trump has made it clear that he wants
to rule America by imperial decree. He
didn’t want to be king just for a day in
America. He wants to be king of the
universe. Congress is just a nuisance
that can be avoided, the courts are an
occasional speed bump, and international law is just a suggestion to
this President.
In his decree declaring war on Iran,
he glibly responded to the loss of
American lives by saying: ‘‘That’s the
way it is.’’
With no clear objectives, no approval
from the Congress, and no commitment
to keep the ground troops out, more
American deaths and billions of taxpayer dollars wasted will be ‘‘the way
it is.’’
We know that in this regard, Trump
is not America First. At best, he is
America second, as Secretary Rubio
confessed this week.
Trump is too weak to follow President Bush’s wise example of saying no
to Netanyahu. He has dragged us into a
war without an imminent threat. He

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.076

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2410

has committed us to a war that will
further destabilize an already unstable
region of the world, and in Trump’s
own words, this war will go on ‘‘as long
as it takes.’’
The last war like that cost 4,400
American lives and $2 trillion of taxpayer money.
While certainly I do not mourn the
death of any of these despots in Iran
who have done so much harm, under
Trump’s clueless approach, we may
just be replacing one tyrant with another. We already see what is happening to our embassies, our military
facilities, and our airports where many
Americans are stranded abroad.
Mr. Speaker, I urge approval of this
resolution to stop Trump’s forever war.
Unless it is approved, Trump will only
be encouraged to grab more and more
power on his drive for total authoritarian, one-man rule in this country
and the world.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to refrain from engaging in personalities toward the
President.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Mr. Speaker, I think I figured something out. If my colleagues keep saying
that 4 days is forever, then maybe that
is why they can’t talk about what imminent threat means. They can’t figure
out the definition of these things.
Imminent threat, I have done pretty
well to define what makes Iran a imminent threat. They don’t want to speak
about that. They don’t even want to
acknowledge it a little bit that, hey,
maybe there is even a little chance
that Iran could attack us this day.
They don’t even want to acknowledge
it the slightest bit. They want to paint
it as though it is just black and white,
no shot whatsoever, no threat at all
coming from Iran, even though they
voted for things to say: Use all means
necessary to prevent Iran from getting
a nuclear weapon.
It is amazing to me, even though
they have difficulty defining other
words as well.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of
my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I never
heard Donald Trump say it was an imminent threat.
Mr. Speaker, I yield 1 minute to the
gentleman
from
California
(Mr.
GOMEZ).
Mr. GOMEZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today in strong support of this War
Powers Resolution. This is a war of
choice disguised as a war of necessity.
During the last several days, President Trump offered a shifting list of
justifications: regime change; retribution; helping protesters; stopping
Iran’s missile and nuclear weapons program, a program that Trump claimed
just last year that he obliterated; and
a ballistic missile program that the Department of Defense says is not going
to be capable of reaching the U.S. until
2035.
The Secretary of State, Marco Rubio,
offered another. He said that we had to

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:52 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

strike first in case Iran might retaliate
after a possible Israeli attack.
Think about that. It is not because
Iran posed an imminent threat, not because Congress authorized war, but because someone else might attack.
This is not a strategy. This is cherrypicking facts and lying to the American public to justify a predetermined
decision to launch a war.
So Americans are asking two questions: Why are we doing this?
And how does it end?
The Constitution is clear. The President cannot start a war alone.
We need to make sure that the people’s Representatives are involved.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. The
time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield an
additional 30 seconds to the gentleman
from California.
Mr. GOMEZ. That is because once
troops are in harm’s way, missions expand, and working families get a knock
on the door that changes their lives
forever.
The cost of this war will not just be
measured by dollars spent but in lives
lost, bodies broken, and conflicts that
rarely stay confined to where they
began.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to close if the gentleman is prepared to close, and I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time to close.
Mr. Speaker, first, I want to be clear
about what this resolution is not. It is
not a vote for or against war with Iran.
It is not an authorization for use of
military force. It does not prevent the
United States from defending itself. It
does not restrict our U.S. military
from protecting our troops or our assets or our interests.
Mr. Speaker, you may have heard
some of those claims on the other side
today. They are wrong.
What is the War Powers Resolution?
What is it?
It is simple. It simply requires hostilities to stop unless and until Congress does what the Constitution says
it should do: authorize them. That is
what the Constitution says. It affirms
a basic principle: No President can
take this action or take this Nation to
war against whomever whenever that
President wishes to do it without congressional authorization.
b 1730
This is a war. The administration has
said so themselves. We have heard
many Members on the other side of the
aisle say this is a war. This is a war,
but it is a war of choice, not a war authorized by the United States Congress.
In the administration’s own war powers notification—and if you haven’t
read it, we will give it to you—they do
not use or mention the word ‘‘imminent’’ at all, not once. The administration has presented no imminent threat.
Why? It is because it cannot.

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

I want to give my colleagues the definition of the word ‘‘imminent.’’ If it
was so imminent, Donald Trump didn’t
do anything when he was the President
before.
How long will this war last? We don’t
know. The administration doesn’t seem
to know. Their stated objectives are
expansive and shifting every day. They
seem to shift. One day I heard them
say it was regime change. The next day
I heard them say it is nuclear weapons.
Then after that, it was ballistic missiles, and then we heard the Secretary
of State say Israel was going to strike
first, and so we felt we had to. Otherwise, Iran would strike first.
Mr. Speaker, this administration’s
case for war makes the Bush administration’s weapons of mass destruction
story look like a well-documented
Ph.D. dissertation.
Now, to the Members of Congress
who disagree with my opposition to
this war: I disagree because I have listened and I have heard, and I disagree
with this war. But I say to them: If you
disagree with this war, it is your prerogative, but you should vote. We
should have a vote.
This vote is not about whether or not
you support military action. It is about
whether you believe Congress should
have a say. In essence, it kind of meant
should we exist. The Constitution said
we should exist. We were created as a
country because they were running
from a king who did not want a Congress, who didn’t have a Congress, who
could just do whatever he wanted.
That is why the first thing that the
Founders said is Congress should be the
only one that had the power. Leader
JEFFRIES said—and he went back to a
Republican Member of the House of
Representatives, Abraham Lincoln,
who said: ‘‘The provisions of the Constitution giving the war making power
to Congress was dictated, as I understand it, by the following reasons.
Kings had always been involving and
impoverishing their people in wars,
pretending generally, if not always, the
good of the people was the object. This,
our Convention understood to be the
most oppressive of all Kingly oppressions; and they resolved to so frame
the Constitution that no one man
should hold the power of bringing this
oppression upon us’’—no one man.
We took an oath. We swore to uphold
Article I of the Constitution. Our constituents expect us to deliberate on
matters of war and peace.
Did we deliberate on it? No.
Have we had hearings in the House
Foreign Affairs Committee? No.
Have we had Mr. Jared Kushner here
to talk about it? He was supposed to
have been negotiating. No.
Have we had Steve Witkoff here? No.
Have we had anyone other than—
they came for other reasons; we were
able to ask a few questions—than Secretary Rubio come? No.
Has there been not dialogue and conversation? We have the so-called Gang
of Eight, and they want to say that is

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.078

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

March 4, 2026

notification. Well, let’s talk about it.
We didn’t ever debate anything on the
floor of the House.
How many times has the Gang of
Eight met? Once. Speaker JOHNSON
would say that is sufficient. Even in
that, this imminent strike was never
mentioned. We heard from Mr. HIMES,
who is part of the Gang of Eight. The
next time the Gang of Eight was heard
was only a few hours before the one
who wants to be king said he was going
to attack. That is the only dialogue
and conversation that took place before the strike.
There has been no debate on the
floor, no trying to talk to the Members
of Congress and, most importantly, the
American people because just before
the State of the Union, when the President had the whole world, we heard a
whole 2-hour speech, the longest in the
history of these United States of America, Iran was hardly a mention. If it
was an imminent threat, I would think
he would want to tell the Nation at
that time that we had to do something
imminently.
We have soldiers who have died, and
the President starts talking about curtains and reconstruction and putting
gold things up because he likes it. He
told families, Gold Star families now
unfortunately, that it wasn’t serious
enough.
This is a serious situation. Congress
is a coequal branch of government. The
Framers vested the war powers in this
body because they believed no single
person should bring this Nation to war
alone, and so today we either defend
our principles or surrender it. I urge
my colleagues to join me in defending
it, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. MAST. Mr. Speaker, my colleague ended with: ‘‘This is serious.’’
This is serious. It is more serious
than when my colleagues can’t even acknowledge a hint of an emergency, a
hint of imminence related to the threat
of Iran—there is nothing to see there—
even though last Congress so many of
them voted, including Ranking Member MEEKS, to say use all means necessary to prevent Iran from obtaining a
nuclear weapon.
Why would they say ‘‘all means necessary’’? I guess it is because a year
ago they believed it to be that imminent, that important.
It was said by the ranking member,
their bill doesn’t prevent the U.S. from
defending ourselves. It literally does.
Let me read the text for you: ‘‘ . . . directs the President to terminate the
use of United States Armed Forces
from hostilities against the Islamic Republic of Iran or any part of its government or military, unless explicitly authorized by a declaration of war . . . ‘’
That means the President cannot go
out there and defend the United States
of America. It is saying the President
has no Article II authority to go out
there and defend the United States of
America. That is literally what they
are saying.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

08:14 Mar 05, 2026

H2411

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

b 1740
He said our hostilities must stop, but
I can promise you, the hostilities of
Iran will not stop, have never stopped
until the United States of America
makes this decision to stop them.
Mr. Speaker, I thank President
Trump for having the courage, the
strength, and the resolve to stop the
imminent threat of Iran from attacking the United States of America as
they have week after week, year after
year for the last 47 years. It is the very
definition of imminent.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. HILL of Arkansas. Mr. Speaker, I rise in
opposition to H. Con. Res. 38, Directing the
President pursuant to section 5(c) of the War
Powers Resolution to remove United States
Armed Forces from unauthorized hostilities in
the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The United States and the Islamic Republic
of Iran have had an adversarial relationship
since the 1979 Iranian Revolution. In 1979,
Iranian theocratic revolutionaries removed
Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, who was a
close U.S. ally. and the current Islamic Republic was declared. The establishment of the Islamic Republic, also known as the Iranian regime, in conjunction with the U.S. Embassy
hostage crisis, laid the groundwork for the
United States to have no diplomatic relations
with Iran beginning in 1980.
Since 1979, the United States has used
sanctions and diplomacy to deter, constrain,
and encourage the Iranian regime to change
its egregious behavior. That behavior includes
supporting terrorism at home and becoming
the globe’s largest state sponsor of terrorism,
developing a nuclear weapon program, proliferation activities, destabilizing the region
through its ballistic missile and drone development, and attacks directly and indirectly killing
Americans for over four decades. That sanction posture is now over four decades old.
In 1979, the Carter Administration imposed
sanctions on Iran in response to the U.S. Embassy hostage crisis. In the 1980s and 1990s,
Congress expanded sanctions on Iran to deter
and compel the Iranian regime to stop supporting international terrorism and its pursuit of
advanced weapons. including chemical, biological, and nuclear. In 2002, the United
States and our allies learned about previously
undisclosed nuclear facilities in Iran. In response. the United States and our allies imposed further sanctions on Iran to convince
the Iranian regime to limit its nuclear activities.
The Iranian regime did not stop or limit the activities, so in 2006 the United Nations Security
Council imposed multinational sanctions preventing trade with Iran. In 2009. the Iranian regime violently cracked down on mass protests
over its 2009 presidential election. In response, Congress targeted more sanctions on
Iran that aimed at Iran’s oil exports and economic sector. Congress determined that to lift
those sanctions, the Iranian regime must stop
its support of international terrorism and end
its proliferation activities. That has never happened, as the Iranian regime is the number
one state sponsor of terrorism and has continued to pursue nuclear and advanced weapons.
In 2015, the Obama Administration tried a
new approach of appeasement and entered
the United States into the disastrous Joint

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 9920

Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCOPA). This
is also known as the ‘‘2015 Iran nuclear deal,’’
which required Iran to curb its nuclear program, reduce uranium enrichment by 98 percent, and dismantle most centrifuges. In exchange, the United States, China, France,
Germany, Russia, and the United Kingdom
agreed to provide significant relief from international sanctions imposed on Iran. This deal
was disastrous because Iran continued to enrich uranium and pursue their nuclear weapons goals. In addition to that disastrous policy,
the Obama Administration transferred $1.7 billion in cash to Iran in January 2016. On top
of that, the 2015 Iran nuclear deal allowed billions in new commerce to flow into Iran.
Again, remember that the Iranian regime is the
number one state sponsor of terrorism. That
money benefited the Iranian regime’s dangerous behavior.
In 2018, President Trump pulled the United
States out of the disastrous 2015 Iran nuclear
deal and announced that the United States
would reimpose sanctions on Iran. With no
delay, Iran escalated its regional military activities, which included directly attacking the
United States forces in the region.
The Biden Administration was unable to
deter the Iranian regime. In addition, the Biden
Administration recklessly provided Iran with
sanctions relief that gave Iran access to approximately 816 billion in previously frozen
funds. Those shortsighted actions of the Biden
Administration sadly played a part in the buildup of the October 7th attack on Israel by the
Iranian regime-backed terrorist organization,
Hamas. In response, Congress passed new
sanctions on any foreign financial institution
that engages in transactions with the $6 billion
in Iranian funds. In 2024, my bill, the Holding
Iranian Leaders Accountable Act, was signed
into law to expose the Iranian regime’s financial corruption.
In 2025, back in the White House, the
Trump Administration renewed a ‘‘Maximum
Pressure’’ campaign on the Iranian regime.
The actions by President Trump and his Administration recognize that nearly five decades
of sanctions imposed bilaterally and by the
United Nations have failed to stop Iran’s destructive ambitions. The Trump Administration
recognizes that years of intensive but ultimately futile negotiations over Iran’s nuclear
weapons program accomplished nothing and
were rightly rejected by bipartisan majorities in
both the House and Senate at the end of the
Obama Administration.
Today, the House is considering a War
Powers Resolution. This War Powers Resolution does not account for the nearly five decades of history. This resolution is not about
whether we support the major combat operation that is currently ongoing in Iran—it is
about curbing the power of the Executive
Branch, specifically the President, to protect
the United States from the Iranian regime.
Taking away the authorities granted to the
President under the War Powers Resolution in
the very midst of an ongoing major combat
operation is reckless and shortsighted.
I encourage my colleagues to oppose H.
Con. Res. 38.
Mr. GREEN of Texas. Mr. Speaker, and still
I rise, supportive of this measure which would
bring an end to United States involvement in
hostilities against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Decisions of war and peace are some of the
most serious and consequential that could be

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.080

H04MRPT1

H2412

made by our government, and as such the
framers of the Constitution delegated the
power to declare war exclusively to Congress,
the body meant to represent the will and deliberation of the people themselves. The purpose
of this delegation of power was in part to ensure no single person could be influenced by
poor judgment to make a deadly miscalculation.
This is precisely what is happening to us
today. President Trump, emboldened by a
questionable operation in Venezuela and manipulated by Prime Minister Netanyahu, has
sacrificed American lives and military resources in a regime change operation. The
American people have been very vocal with
their elected officials. They are tired of war.
They want us to focus our energy and treasure on improving American lives at home.
War in all its forms is Hell. Only occasionally, and after careful consideration, can this
Hell on Earth be considered necessary. It is
Congress’ duty to conduct this deliberation,
and to ensure no one person can declare war.
Congress must reclaim its constitutional authority to declare war. Mr. Speaker, I will vote
for this resolution.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. All time
for debate has expired. Pursuant to the
order of the House of March 3, 2026, the
previous question is ordered on the
concurrent resolution.
The question is on adoption of the
concurrent resolution.
The question was taken; and the
Speaker pro tempore announced that
the noes appeared to have it.
Mr. MEEKS. Mr. Speaker, on that I
demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX, further proceedings on this question are postponed.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

THANKING THORNTON FIRE DEPARTMENT
AND
FIRST
RESPONDERS
(Mr. EVANS of Colorado asked and
was given permission to address the
House for 1 minute and to revise and
extend his remarks.)
Mr. EVANS of Colorado. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to thank the Thornton
Fire Department, the Thornton Police
Department, and every assisting first
responder who rushed to the scene last
week to extinguish a suburban wildfire
in my district.
As a former cop and Army National
Guard Black Hawk helicopter pilot who
fought wildfires, I am proud of these
first responders and their continued
dedication to protecting our communities. What could have been a devastating disaster resulted in no loss of
life or homes thanks to these brave heroes.
However, as the Marshall fire, the
worst wildfire in Colorado history, reminds us, suburban wildfires can become catastrophic, and emergency
management funding is critical in disaster-prone regions like Colorado.
Mr. Speaker, I strongly urge my
Democrat colleagues to vote in favor of
the Department of Homeland Secu-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

06:52 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

rity’s appropriation bill and restore
FEMA funding, emergency management funding, for my constituents and
for constituents around the country.
f

WAR IN IRAN
(Ms. KAPTUR asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, too many
Americans cannot afford their health
insurance. Medical facilities are facing
serious cutbacks and staff shortages.
Housing is unaffordable for millions of
our people, and the cost of living is getting out of hand.
Instead of addressing any one of
these critical issues here at home, this
weekend, the Trump-Vance administration singularly launched a regimechange war on Iran. Significant U.S.
military forces and hundreds of millions of dollars are being deployed
without congressional authorization.
As a cosponsor of the Iran War Powers Resolution, I know that no such
vote was called in either Chamber of
Congress prior to this profound and unprecedented military action.
As Americans from coast to coast
honor the sacrifice of the six brave
servicemembers who already lost their
lives in this war, our people have a
right to hear debate before more U.S.
troops and military assets are sent
abroad. Billions and billions of U.S.
taxpayer dollars are being expended in
this war which could last for weeks or
months or years.
The economic impact of the closure
of the Strait of Hormuz is already
being felt. Yesterday, the price of gasoline was bobbing up and down, up and
down. The American people deserve affordability, not more foreign wars.
f

COUNTERING IRAN’S AGGRESSION
AND PROTECTING OUR COUNTRY
(Ms. GILLEN asked and was given
permission to address the House for 1
minute and to revise and extend her remarks.)
Ms. GILLEN. Mr. Speaker, I rise
today to condemn the Iranian regime
as it threatens the United States and
our ally Israel.
Iran is the world’s leading state sponsor of terror, bankrolling the heinous
terrorist groups Hamas, Hezbollah, and
the Houthis.
The regime and its proxies seek to
destroy America and Israel and wreak
havoc across the Middle East.
Let me be clear: Iran can never be allowed to obtain nuclear weapons, and
the United States must always be prepared to act to prevent a nucleararmed Iran.
Our Nation is eternally grateful to
the brave servicemembers who are
keeping us safe, and we mourn those
who have been lost in the line of duty.
Mr. Speaker, I hope the administration will come to Congress with a plan
and work with us to counter Iran’s aggression and protect our country.

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

CHILDREN’S SAVINGS ACCOUNTS
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. MOORE of
Utah was recognized for 60 minutes as
the designee of the majority leader.)
GENERAL LEAVE

Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
ask unanimous consent that all Members may have 5 legislative days in
which to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous material
on the topic of this Special Order.
The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there
objection to the request of the gentleman from Utah?
There was no objection.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker, I
am glad to be joined by my colleagues
this evening.
Before my remarks, I yield to the
gentleman from Colorado (Mr. CRANK).
Mr. CRANK. Mr. Speaker, I thank
the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Speaker, America often faces difficult moments and difficult choices.
Presidents are no different. They oftentimes have to face difficult decisions,
and I hope that Members of this body
will think about their vote as they decide whether to support the President
in this effort or not and apply the same
standard.
I have always thought to try and
apply the same standard, whether the
President belongs to the Republican
Party or the Democratic Party, apply
the same standard.
I rise today in support of President
Trump’s action against Iran. The Iranian regime has been threatening
America for nearly 50 years. It has
killed countless American citizens, and
it has brutally killed our servicemembers.
I had a gentleman in my district
come up to me the other day. This was
before the President took action, and
he said: We must take action. He said:
I have lost 20 of my friends to the Iranians, to their terror throughout the
years. He had served 24 years in the
United States Army.
In years prior, we have had Presidents use strikes against our enemies
and have done it without congressional
approval because the Constitution does
a couple of things. In Article I, it gives
Congress the power to declare war, but
in Article II, it gives the President the
power to be the Commander in Chief.
Our Founders intentionally made it inherently contradict in that way.
They wanted to diffuse power. They
didn’t want to give all the power to
Congress, and they didn’t want to give
all the power to the President of the
United States, so they intentionally
did that. Presidents throughout time
have used that.
Thomas Jefferson in the First Barbary War did not come to Congress. He
deployed troops in the Barbary War.
The War of 1812, the same thing was
done, although Congress did come back
and authorize and declare war. It
wasn’t done at first.
We have had Presidents use these
strikes against our enemies without

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.028

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

congressional approval in modern
times, like President Obama in Libya
or President Clinton in Kosovo. Yet,
for some reason, the other side of the
aisle wants to make a political statement on this particular issue because
of who the President is.
b 1750
Mr. Speaker, that is not a standard
any of us should apply. I would hope, as
a legislator—I wasn’t here when Bill
Clinton was President. I wasn’t here
when Barack Obama was President. I
can say that I had a public life then. I
didn’t go out and attack the President
of the United States at that time.
I am here to support the men and
women of the military and the Presidents who have to make tough decisions from time to time. For some reason, on the other side of the aisle,
many want to make a political statement rather than just let the President
use his legal authority as Commander
in Chief, as stated in the Constitution.
Both Republican and Democratic
Presidents have attempted to negotiate
deals with this Iranian regime, only to
be met with lies and deception. We
have seen it time and time again.
Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear. If
President Trump had not acted, every
American life in the region would have
been in immediate peril.
The President and his administration
have set clear goals. What are they?
They are to annihilate their nuclear
capabilities, to annihilate their Navy,
and to annihilate their missile and delivery capability. This will save the
globe from Iran’s regime of terror.
Time and time again, my colleagues
on the other side of the aisle have
claimed that any military action will
draw us into a long-term war. They say
it is going to happen. Just a few short
months ago in Venezuela, we had folks
who said: Well, why didn’t the President come to Congress and have us declare war?
Did we declare war on Venezuela? No.
Are we at war with Venezuela? No. It
was a 1-day action that the President
has the authority to undertake as
Commander in Chief of the United
States military.
It didn’t happen in Venezuela. They
told us that the President will draw us
into a long-term conflict. It didn’t happen in Operation Midnight Hammer
when the President ordered B–2 bombers to deliver strikes on Iranian nuclear sites. It is not going to happen
now.
President Trump made every effort
to find a peaceful and negotiated solution to this crisis. Ayatollah Khamenei
only sought death to America. He had
no intention of negotiating.
In fact, for 47 years, this regime has
simply used deception, lies, and deals
to kick the can down the road so that
they could pursue their nuclear ambitions. They were never giving up on
that. They didn’t give up on it after
Operation Midnight Hammer and not
until this regime has ended.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

H2413

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Due to Khamenei’s death, I believe
the United States has avoided a prolonged conflict that would have killed
many Americans. I find some of the
comments by my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle outlandish, and I
hope that they will choose.
So many say they support the nation
of Israel. So many can stand up and say
they support our men and women in
the military. It is time to choose. Will
they choose to defend our Nation first
instead of their political games directed at a President? If they choose
political games directed at a President,
when this President is gone, they will
have damaged the institution of the
Presidency. They will have damaged
the honor of this House of Representatives.
Mr. MOORE of Utah. Mr. Speaker,
the gentleman from Colorado is adjacent to some of the most important
military apparatuses of our country,
USAFA, where we share a border. I appreciate his focus on such a strong
need for our military.
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to express my excitement,
which I don’t often say, my excitement
for this tax season. Those are not
words I oftentimes say, nor do many
Americans. There is reason to be excited this year in the wake of passing
incredibly important, progrowth tax
policy last summer, which the House
Republicans led and then signed into
law. This is historic relief.
The thing I wanted to highlight is
what we are providing for working families and everyday Americans. In that,
there is one specific thing that I wanted to highlight. That is Trump Accounts. These are the new investment
accounts for children. Invest America
has been an initiative for several years.
It has been a thought and an idea for
even longer, decades even. We were
able to get this signed into law, and it
will be enacted and started later this
year.
Mr. Speaker, I will talk a little bit
more about what the process is and
what this actually is. This is a transformational investment for kids in
every ZIP Code. It doesn’t matter if a
person lives in an apartment, a big
city, or on a country road out in rural
America. Our kids will have access to
something that most people don’t take
advantage of until they are well into
their careers.
Trump Accounts allow parents,
guardians, and other custodians to establish a new type of tax-advantaged
individual savings and investment account for children. As part of a special
pilot program, every American child
born between January 1, 2025—more
than a year ago—and December 31,
2028, is eligible to receive an automatic
deposit of $1,000 from the U.S. Government into their accounts, giving every
newborn a stake in the future success
of the American economy.
Parents can also contribute up to
$5,000 per year and employers up to
$2,500 per year. State, local, and Tribal

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

governments, as well as charities, can
also contribute.
We have seen significant interest in
this program, including an incredible
contribution of $6.25 billion with a b
from Michael and Susan Dell and their
family’s private foundation. That contribution is going to be geared toward
those children who were born in the
last 10 years. The initiative that we
passed this year will be focused on the
next 4 years.
What Michael and Susan Dell have
done is they contributed over $6 billion
to start these accounts and seed them
with money for children, essentially
ages 2 through 10, in neighborhoods and
communities across our country. This
will get them started. They have this
investment account that they will
have, as I mentioned, well into their
careers. I think it essentially gives
them a 30-year head start on their retirements.
At the very heart of this policy is the
goal of providing opportunities for
Americans at that very early age. Good
government policy empowers the individual. It nurtures and encourages the
best of human ingenuity and, of course,
human progress. That is exactly what
these investment accounts aim to do.
The United States boasts the world’s
strongest economy. Thanks to strong
capital markets and household investments, we can contribute to our communities, society, and economy. We
can improve our overall quality of life
and seek financial realities better than
the ones from which we came.
However, wealth and opportunity
gaps prevent millions of people from
taking advantage of the capital markets that could help build household
wealth.
Capitalism is the gateway to opportunity and helping our youth realize
the power of compounding interest and
how it could change their lives. These
accounts will play a key role in it.
The fact that we have, at the age of
4—I have a 4-year-old. The fact that
Frankie will have an account that is
tied to him, and he will be able to monitor that. When he is 10, he will understand it a bit better. He won’t understand it right now.
Think about it. When he goes to a
fifth grade class and the teacher says:
‘‘Hey, everybody. Pull out your investment account.’’ There is a good chance
they have all signed up for it if we have
done our jobs. We have 435 Members of
this body. If we do our jobs in communicating this benefit to our constituents, this will grow. This program will
be wildly successful. They will be able
to say: Hey, look, it started at X. Now
it is at Y.
They have an extra 20 bucks that
month for some chores that they did.
They are going to put an extra 20 bucks
in it. A grandparent is going to say
that every grandkid gets $2,000 this
year.
That is the best investment in their
kids. Instead of buying an extra pair of
shoes sometimes, they will put money

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.083

H04MRPT1

H2414

directly into their future and, ultimately, into their retirement.
b 1800
This is a historic new savings tool.
More Americans will be saving. They
will be investing and building a solid
financial footing.
These accounts have the potential to
help children accrue tens of thousands
of dollars by the time they reach adulthood. That can make the difference in
so many lives when it comes to paying
for college, building their first home,
starting their own business, and what I
am most hopeful for, and what I will
continue to put the focus on is as they
save for their own retirement.
I think typical IRAs, Roth 401(k)’s, or
Roth IRAs, anything of the like, you
are typically maybe 30 years old when
you start your first one. Think about
starting that 30 years earlier. It is a
small amount of money to start, but
that is going to grow for 30 years,
where they wouldn’t have otherwise
had that.
This is a game changer. These accounts will come online July 5 of this
year, 2026, but here is the important
part: Parents can create an account
today for their children. Those born between 2025 and 2028 will have their accounts seeded with $1,000, but, again,
every child under age 18 can have an
account.
To be an American is to win life’s
lottery. We live in the greatest Nation
in the world with tremendous freedoms
and unparalleled opportunities. We
have the ability to chase the American
Dream from childhood through retirement, and these accounts will help
more people achieve it.
I am really excited about these accounts and what this means to the next
generation. It is good for Utahns. It is
good for working families, and it is
good for our country’s future.
I urge everyone to take advantage of
this
and
sign
up
today
at
trumpaccounts.gov.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

f

RECOGNIZING MARTIN HOGAN
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. CARTER of
Georgia was recognized for 30 minutes.)
Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Martin
Hogan for being named the grand marshal of Savannah’s 202nd St. Patrick’s
Day Parade.
Mr. Hogan was chosen from hundreds
of nominees to lead the parade and represent the community. Savannah’s annual St. Patrick’s Day Parade is one of
the largest festivals in the country and
has been taking place for more than 200
years.
Each year, the fountain in Forsyth
Park is dyed green, and thousands of
people travel to Savannah to celebrate.
Mr. Hogan hopes to bring back deeper
meaning to the holidays, focusing on
the importance of the St. Patrick’s

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

Day feast, not just the mischief and
fun, and there is plenty of that.
Martin is a logistics and trucking
professional who has many years of experience and has made significant contributions to the community. Mr.
Hogan is a dedicated and hardworking
individual who is more than qualified
for this role.
We are excited to see Mr. Hogan represent the city of Savannah with honor
and distinction.
‘‘Ireland forever’’; ‘‘Erin go bragh.’’
HONORING LINDA DAVIS

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor Dr. Linda
Davis, the beloved special education
teacher who was tragically taken from
us on February 16, 2026.
A native of Beaufort, South Carolina,
she made her home in Pooler, Georgia,
bringing warmth and positivity to
every community she touched.
In her first year at Hesse K–8 School
in Savannah, Dr. Davis taught young
students with special needs, greeting
each with an infectious smile, patience, and belief in their potential.
For nearly 18 years, Linda devoted
her career to education, creating nurturing spaces where every child felt
seen and valued. Colleagues recall her
kindness and her ability to make everyone feel that they truly mattered.
A devoted wife, a mother of five, sister, and mentor, Linda loved dancing,
singing, and family.
Linda’s was a life taken too soon by
an individual fleeing ICE, who never
should have been in our country in the
first place.
May we cherish educators like Dr.
Linda Davis, who shaped brighter futures one child at a time.
I thank Linda for her beautiful spirit.
She is deeply missed.
CELEBRATING VISIT SAVANNAH ON 50TH
ANNIVERSARY

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise to recognize Visit Savannah
as it celebrates its 50th anniversary.
This marks a significant milestone for
the city’s journey in becoming a major
tourist destination.
Visit Savannah began its work by attempting to attract drivers off of the
interstate. The organization has now
grown into a major contributor to the
major growth of Savannah’s tourism
industry. Visit Savannah attracts approximately 16 million visitors each
year, generating billions of dollars in
economic impact.
Savannah is Georgia’s third biggest
city and now one of the most popular
places to visit. Visit Savannah has generated $4.1 billion in direct spending
annually.
The city’s tourism has not only generated over 28,000 local jobs but also
improved infrastructure and advanced
the culinary scene across Savannah
and Chatham County.
We thank Visit Savannah for 50 years
of dedicated and impactful service to
Georgia’s First District.
RECOGNIZING STEVEN C. ANDERSON

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the re-

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

markable 20-year tenure of Steven C.
Anderson as president and CEO of the
National Association of Chain Drug
Stores.
Mr. Anderson has announced his retirement from NACDS, effective at the
end of this year. Under his leadership,
NACDS transformed from a challenging period into one of the Nation’s
strongest
and
most
respected
healthcare trade associations.
Mr. Anderson guided the organization through the 2008 financial crisis
and the COVID–19 pandemic, rebuilding
its foundation for long-term strength,
contributing to America’s recovery,
and elevating the organization into a
trusted source for research and policy.
His tenure has shaped pharmacy’s
vital role, helping shift community
pharmacies from underappreciated to
essential frontline providers of care.
His efforts led to landmark PBM reform legislation, helping to deliver
transparency and accountability.
Steve’s legacy is one of unity, innovation, and commitment to advancing
pharmacy’s mission and serving communities and families.
Mr. Speaker, we thank Steve Anderson
for
two
decades
of
transformational and dedicated service.
RECOGNIZING ELANA MEYERS TAYLOR

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize American
bobsledder, Elana Meyers Taylor.
After making Team USA for the 2026
Winter Olympics, which made her a
five-time Olympian, Elana went on to
bring home the gold medal in women’s
monobob.
A Douglasville, Georgia, native and
George Washington University graduate, Meyers exhibits true sportsmanship and grit, highlighting outstanding
American athleticism.
Since 2007, Elana has been a dominant force in bobsledding. In 2009, she
secured a silver medal in the twowoman bobsled at the FIBT World
Championships. She won a bronze
medal at the 2010 Winter Olympics and
a silver medal at the 2014 Winter Olympics.
In 2010, she also helped the U.S. win
its first women’s Bobsled World Championship title by beating three German
teams. In the 2018 Olympics, she continued her storied history of success,
winning another silver medal.
This year, though, she added to her
titles of oldest Olympic bobsled medalist, mother, and comeback athlete,
finishing her event in 3 minutes, 57.93
seconds, and earning that of Olympic
gold medalist.
We are all so proud of Elana and how
she has represented both Team USA
and the wonderful State of Georgia.
MISS SOPHIE’S RESTAURANT TO RELAUNCH AT
MIGHTY EIGHTH MUSEUM

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the relaunching of Miss Sophie’s restaurant.
The restaurant located in Pooler,
Georgia, was relaunched under new
ownership at the National Museum of
the Mighty Eighth Air Force.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.085

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

Miss Sophie’s was first founded in
2006 by Hazlehurst, Georgia, native
Teri Bell and her husband, Steve.
It will now be owned and operated by
Kay Heritage, the founder of Big Bon
Bodega, an award-winning restaurant
that has been featured on Food Network’s ‘‘Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives.’’
The new owner will be joined by her
partner and executive chef. Together,
they are known for their love of quality food and hope to continue Teri’s vision and honor her legacy in Pooler,
continuing a tradition that the community loves by serving classic southern lunch favorites.
We thank Kay Heritage for her hard
work and dedication, and we are excited to see Miss Sophie’s continuing
to serve the people of Pooler.
b 1810
RECOGNIZING BLAND FARMS AND THE VIDALIA
ONION COMMITTEE

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Bland
Farms in Glennville, Georgia, for winning the Grower of the Year Award
from the Vidalia Onion Committee.
This award has been given continuously since 1991 and is a testament to
the long history of onion farming in
the Vidalia area.
For almost 80 years, Bland Farms has
been producing high-quality Vidalia
onions, now consumed around the
world. Their family-run farm has been
instrumental in expanding the distribution and recognition of official
Vidalia sweet onions.
In 1995, Bland Farms entered the frozen market, quickly becoming the Nation’s third largest distributor of frozen onion products. In the past few
years, Bland Farms has implemented
cutting-edge technology to improve
cold storage and quality assurance of
their products.
I also recognize the work of the
Vidalia Onion Committee for its dedication to upholding quality and expanding access to our official Georgia
State Vegetable.
Vidalia sweet onions have protected
status, an official growing area in
south Georgia, and strict quality control. The Vidalia Onion Committee
works tirelessly to uphold these standards.
Once again, I congratulate Bland
Farms on their exceptional work this
past year.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

HONORING BASEBALL LEGEND ANDRUW JONES

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Andruw
Jones, the legendary center fielder for
the Atlanta Braves, who has been
elected to the National Baseball Hall of
Fame as part of the Class of 2026.
This honor celebrates the extraordinary talent and athleticism he
brought to baseball, especially during
Atlanta’s golden era of dominance,
making him the eighth member of the
Braves’ 1997 team to be elected.
Mr. Jones exemplifies Georgia’s
fighting spirit. He burst onto the scene
as a 19-year-old, homering twice in his

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

H2415

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

first World Series game in 1996, becoming the youngest ever to do so, and
helping fuel 14 straight division titles.
A ten-time Gold Glove winner, fivetime All-Star, and powerhouse with 434
home runs, he inspired generations,
while proudly carrying the torch from
Willie Mays, who once declared him
the best center fielder he had seen.
Mr. Jones’ induction on July 26 is a
triumph for Braves nation and our
great State of Georgia. Go Braves.
CONGRATULATING DONALD CHASE

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to congratulate Donald
Chase, who has been elected chairman
of the Georgia Peanut Commission.
The Georgia Peanut Commission was
founded in 1961 and represents more
than 4,000 peanut farm families across
the State of Georgia.
Mr. Chase was chosen to lead this
historically vital organization as the
number one crop in Georgia, succeeding Joe Boddiford, due to his long
experience as a grower and prior service as vice chairman.
In his own words, 2026 marks a year
of change for the commission, yet its
core mission remains steadfast: delivering real value to every Georgia peanut farmer. He and the board pledge
that their commitment to ensuring
farmers’ investments yield meaningful
dividends through smart research, promotion, and education. Mr. Chase’s
leadership will help safeguard and
strengthen Georgia’s position as the
Nation’s top peanut-producing state.
Mr. Speaker, I wish the best of luck
to Chairman Donald Chase and the
Georgia Peanut Commission.
HONORING CECIL HOLT, JR.

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor the life and
legacy of Cecil C. Holt, Jr., who sadly
passed away at the age of 87 earlier
this month. Born in Ambrose, Georgia,
Cecil built something extraordinary
from humble beginnings.
In 1965, he founded Holt’s Bakery into
which he poured his heart, unmatched
work ethic, and entrepreneurial spirit,
growing it into a business that became
iconic across South Georgia. What
started with him and his beloved wife,
Lucille, has grown into a family tradition that has delighted generations.
Even after a severe heart attack, his
innovative spirit never faded. He continued inventing, always living by his
catch phrase ‘‘never give up.’’
In Waycross, Holt’s Sweet Shop
stands as a shining testament to his vision, serving as a cherished spot where
locals still line up for the best goods
around. His sweet shop locations, like
Waycross, keep his legacy alive, sweetening mornings and bringing smiles to
hundreds of faces a day.
He leaves a family and a community
forever enriched.
HONORING THE LIFE OF SANDRA PARKER

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise to honor the gracious life of
Sandra Waters Parker, who sadly
passed away on February 3.

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Mrs. Parker was born in Brunswick,
Georgia, as the eldest of seven children. She lived in Darien for 57 years,
graduating Darien High as vice president of her class and receiving the
highest honor of valedictorian.
Mrs. Parker worked for the State of
Georgia for 35 years in both the Department of Family and Children Services and the McIntosh County Chamber
of Commerce.
For more than 70 years, Mrs. Parker
was an active and devoted member of
Crescent Baptist Church, holding the
roles of Sunday school teacher, pianist,
and treasurer.
Mrs. Parker will be remembered for
her kind, generous, and honorable
heart, serving her family, her State,
and church diligently and compassionately.
Mr. Speaker, I pray for her family
and friends in this time of grief, but
find comfort in the fact Sandra has
walked through the pearly gates.
HONORING REAR ADMIRAL JAY CLARK

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor Rear Admiral
Jay Clark. On February 5, Rear Admiral Clark assumed command of the
Carrier Strike Group One based in San
Diego, California.
Rear Admiral Clark is a Pembroke,
Georgia, native and graduate of Bryan
County High School.
He was previously the director of the
Navy’s Culture and Force Resilience
Office and commanding officer of the
USS Roosevelt, among other prestigious
positions. His continued service to our
Nation is indicative of South Georgia’s
broader commitment to serving our
country and its Navy.
Carrier Strike Group One has a deep
history of protecting our Pacific coast
and broader interests abroad. Recently,
CSG–1
conducted
strikes
against
Houthi targets in Yemen, protecting
American shipping in the Red Sea.
Today, we celebrate Rear Admiral
Clark’s achievements and wish him and
Carrier Strike Group One the best in
their next deployment.
HONORING FERNANDO FOSTER

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor Fernando Foster, the newly elected president of 100
Black Men of Savannah, whose leadership promises real progress for our
children. After 15 years of devoted service, including three as vice president,
Foster began his presidency on January 1.
A respected mentor and community
advocate, he brings both deep experience and bold vision to this historic organization dedicated to empowering
African-American youth.
Foster’s agenda is centered around a
transformative initiative known as The
100 Reads Program, which seeks to enhance literacy among children in Savannah. This program is designed to
engage students through innovative
reading strategies, fostering a love for
literature,
while
improving
educational outcomes. By prioritizing education, Foster and The 100 Black Men

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.088

H04MRPT1

H2416

of Savannah aim to combat the challenges faced by many young learners in
the area. He is determined to reverse
declining literacy rates and spark a
lifelong love of reading.
I congratulate President Fernando
Foster for his focus on literacy as the
foundation of opportunity and his resolve to inspire Savannah’s next generation.
HONORING MVP MATTHEW STAFFORD

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize former
Dawg and current Los Angeles Rams
quarterback, Matthew Stafford, on
winning the NFL Most Valuable Player
Award.
In the closest race since the 2003 cowinners, Stafford beat out Steve
McNair and secured the honor, becoming the oldest player in NFL history at
the time of his first MVP.
In 2006, Stafford became the first true
freshman quarterback to start for the
Georgia Bulldogs since Quincy Carter.
While at Georgia, he sported number 7
and finished his 3 years at Georgia with
a 3–0 record in bowl games and a 6–3
record in rivalry games.
While playing college ball, Stafford
won many awards and honors, including SEC Freshman of the Week and the
MVP of the 2009 Capital One Bowl.
When entering the NFL, Stafford became the first overall pick of the 2009
draft and since then has played for the
Detroit Lions and the Los Angeles
Rams.
We are incredibly proud of Stafford
and look forward to the great things he
does next. Once a Dawg, always a
Dawg.
b 1820

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

RECOGNIZING MIKE MACDONALD

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize former
Georgia Bulldog Assistant Coach Mike
Macdonald for leading the Seattle
Seahawks to a Super Bowl LX victory.
He is the third youngest head coach
in NFL history to win a Super Bowl.
Coach Macdonald attended the University of Georgia in 2010, studying finance, and graduated summa cum
laude.
He started his coaching career as a
graduate assistant at Cedar Shoals
High School in Athens before joining
the Georgia Bulldogs’ coaching staff as
a graduate assistant.
Coach Macdonald joined the Baltimore Ravens’ coaching staff in 2014, became the defensive coordinator for the
Michigan Wolverines in 2021, and then
returned to the Ravens in 2022.
In 2024, Coach Macdonald was hired
by the Seattle Seahawks as their head
coach.
We are proud to see a Georgia Bulldog succeed on the biggest stage in
football.
HONORING ERNEST JONES IV

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize two-time
Super Bowl champion Ernest Jones IV
on his recent Super Bowl win over the
New England Patriots.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

Before becoming a starter for the
South Carolina Gamecocks, Ernest had
a standout high school career in
Waycross, Georgia.
After college, he was drafted in the
third round of the 2021 NFL Draft, with
his career being a testament to persistence and resilience.
He started out in Los Angeles before
bouncing through some trades and
found his home in Seattle, where his
regular-season stats included 124 tackles and 5 interceptions.
Jones is one of the league’s most disruptive linebackers. The Seahawks’
victory marked his second championship title and showcased the dedication
and drive of the Georgia-born linebacker.
This win is more than just another
ring. It is a heartfelt demonstration of
a journey filled with personal adversity, including the loss of his father
last year.
Georgia is proud of Ernest Jones and
wishes him continued success in his
football career.
HONORING AUGUSTA STUDENTS

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to celebrate three talented students from Augusta University: Lahari, Avery, and Anna.
These talented young leaders have
rightfully earned their spot in the
Georgia Legislative Internship Program for the 2026 session.
These students are immersed in the
State capitol, gaining hands-on experience in the legislative process and public service.
Lahari, a junior from Cumming
studying criminal justice, is eager to
see how bills become law and how these
laws directly impact real people.
Anna, a senior political science
major, is thrilled to shadow legislators,
monitor meetings, and observe the policymaking process up close under the
Gold Dome.
Avery, a junior political science
major from Lawrenceville, has long
been drawn to history and government.
These students are forging lifelong
networks, meeting Georgia leaders, and
discovering how laws shape lives and
livelihoods.
This service represents the highest
form of public service in our great
State.
HONORING PRADEEP TAMANG AND DAVID REED

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor two brave
Gwinnett County police officers who
ran toward danger in the name of serving their community.
On February 1, officers Pradeep
Tamang and David Reed responded to a
routine fraud call at a Holiday Inn near
Stone Mountain, Georgia.
Invited into a hotel room by Kevin
Andrews to discuss the matter, they
were ambushed. The suspect opened
fire, striking both officers. In the exchange, one officer returned fire,
wounding the suspect, who survived
and now faces justice.
Tragically, Officer Tamang, who
joined the force just last year, suc-

PO 00000

Frm 00044

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

cumbed to his injuries and passed
away. He is a hero.
Corporal Reed remains in serious but
stable condition, fighting for recovery.
We owe them our deepest gratitude
for their courage and sacrifice in keeping our communities and our State
safe.
May we never forget those who put
their lives on the line for us all.
HONORING KENDRIA LEE

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Kendria
Lee, associate vice president for external affairs at Georgia Southern University in Statesboro, Georgia.
Kendria has been named an Emerging
Leader recipient in the 2026 Leadership
Forum by Leadership Southeast Georgia. This recognition honors outstanding individuals who demonstrate
exceptional impact, vision, and dedication in advancing community and institutional goals.
Ms. Lee exemplifies this through her
leadership and community engagement
initiatives and by fostering partnerships with economic development agencies, stakeholders, and regional leaders
to align the university’s mission with
broader goals.
She is a proud Double Eagle alumna
with an M.B.A. and a B.B.A. in information services from Parker College of
Business.
Kendria graduated from Leadership
Georgia and holds board positions with
Synovus, Goodwill Southeast Georgia,
and Junior Achievement of Savannah.
Ms. Lee’s passion for building meaningful
connections
and
executing
impactful initiatives is an inspiration
to all.
This honor reflects not only her expertise but her unwavering collaboration and commitment to elevating
Georgia Southern University and Georgia’s communities.
HONORING GREG PARKER

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Greg
Parker, who has been given a 2026 Legacy Leader Award by the Southeast
Georgia Leadership Forum.
Greg is the founder and executive
chairman of Parker’s Kitchen, a convenience store chain that has earned
the honor of Convenience Store Chain
of the Year and is known for high-quality foodservice, strategic growth, and
cutting-edge technology.
On top of building a successful business, Greg has been recognized as
Foodservice Leader of the Year, Tech
Executive of the Year, Citizen of the
Year, and Entrepreneur of the Year,
among many other accolades.
While Greg’s business impact is significant, his love and admiration for
his community are even greater. Greg
has donated more than $30 million to
make a transformative impact across
Georgia and South Carolina in four key
areas: education, hunger, healthcare,
and heroes.
We are honored to have a leader like
Greg advocate for Georgia’s communities.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.090

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026
HONORING KAY FORD

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Kay Ford
as a recipient of the 2026 Legacy Leader
Award.
Mrs. Ford is the definition of a driven
and committed leader, currently serving as chair of BankSouth’s advisory
board for the Savannah market.
She has held numerous senior-level
positions within retail banking and private wealth management, including becoming the first female chair of the Savannah Economic Development Authority Board of Directors in its century-long history.
Throughout her career, Ford has
served on a wide variety of communitydriven boards, like the Savannah Fund
for Excellence in Education, St. Mary’s
Home, and Senior Citizens, Incorporated.
Her passion for engaging and contributing to her community is a testimony
to the servant-leader she is: tireless,
inclusive, and invested in making her
community stronger.
From business ventures to community involvement, Kay Ford has left a
positive impact on the southeast Georgia community.
HONORING SANDRA COLLINS

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor the life and
memory of Sandra Collins, who passed
away on January 29 at the age of 81.
A lifelong member of St. Philip Monumental A.M.E. Church in Savannah,
Sandra lived a life rooted in deep faith,
integrity, and kindness.
Her moral strength and compassionate concern for her fellow Georgians inspired countless others and
shined in her devotion to family and
friends.
Sandra served her community with
dedication, lending her talents to the
boards of the Georgia Association for
Primary Healthcare, the Savannah
Branch NAACP, and the Savannah
Chapter of the American Businesswomen’s Association.
Known for her love of travel, she explored 6 continents and 45 States, yet
her great legacy was always close to
home. She maintained a generous spirit that made the world better through
simple acts of fairness, intelligence,
and warmth.
Though we grieve her passing, we celebrate a life of faith, service, and love.
Sandra Collins will long be remembered and deeply missed.

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

RECOGNIZING JUDGE KRISTI GOODWIN CONNELL

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Judge
Kristi Goodwin Connell, who was appointed as the sixth Superior Court
judge of the Augusta Judicial Circuit.
Judge Connell returns to the same
circuit where she began her legal career.
Judge Connell earned degrees in biology and political science from Converse University. She later received a
master’s degree in healthcare policy
and a Juris Doctor from Mercer University.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

H2417

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Judge Connell served as an assistant
district attorney in the Columbia Judicial Circuit, prosecuting felony and
misdemeanor cases. She was also a
partner at the Connell Law Firm,
where she handled civil, domestic, and
criminal defense matters.
With more than 25 years of legal expertise, Judge Connell brings profound
knowledge and expertise to the bench.
We are confident she will continue to
strengthen the courts of the Augusta
Judicial Circuit with integrity and
dedication.
b 1830
JUDGE JAMES ‘‘JIM’’ KIGER

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Judge
James Kiger for his recent appointment as superior court judge for the
Douglas Judicial Circuit in Douglas
County.
Judge Kiger has 34 years of legal expertise, previously serving in the Douglas County Public Defenders’ Office.
Prior to his service as public defender,
he practiced with a general law firm in
Valdosta, Georgia.
Judge Kiger graduated with honors
from Valdosta State College and
earned his Juris Doctor from the University of Georgia College of Law in
1991.
He and his wife, Brenda, live in
Douglasville, Georgia, and have two
children, Atticus and Barbara.
Once again, I would like to recognize
Judge Kiger for his extraordinary service to the Georgia legal system and
congratulate him on a well-deserved
appointment.
HONORING JUDGE PAMELA ‘‘PAM’’ BETTIS

Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor Pamela Bettis
on her appointment as judge of the
State Court of Henry County. Pam was
sworn in on February 3, 2026, by Governor Brian Kemp.
Judge Bettis brings over 35 years of
distinguished service in criminal justice. She began as a Henry County deputy sheriff in 1990, then served as a patrol officer, undercover narcotics
agent, criminal investigator, and leader at Clayton State University Police.
A Georgia State University graduate
with BS and MS degrees in criminal
justice, Pam earned her JD from
Emory University School of Law in
2025. She advanced as assistant solicitor general, co-founded the law firm
Bettis & Howard, and was appointed solicitor general by Governor Nathan
Deal in 2018, earning Solicitor General
of the Year in 2020.
A lifelong Georgian and 20-year
Henry County resident, Judge Bettis
embodies unmatched commitment to
justice, accountability, and humble
service.
Congratulations to Judge Pam Bettis
on this well-deserved elevation.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance
of my time.

PO 00000

Frm 00045

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

NEW
CENTURY
OF
WESTERN
STRENGTH
AND
POLITICAL
FREEDOM
(Under the Speaker’s announced policy of January 3, 2025, Mr. HARIDOPOLOS
of Florida was recognized for 30 minutes.)
Mr. HARIDOPOLOS. Mr. Speaker, I
rise today to reflect on the recent
speech given by our Secretary of State,
Marco Rubio, a fellow Floridian, who
spoke to the world in Munich about the
path for freedom in the 21st century.
He spoke with clarity, strength, and
even at times humor to paint a vision
that we can all embrace.
Our transatlantic alliance faces both
strain and opportunity. The United
States and Europe are not merely strategic partners. As Secretary Rubio said
so well, we are bound by history, culture, sacrifice, and a shared belief in
liberty. Ours is not a temporary arrangement of convenience but a partnership of a shared civilization that
has shaped the modern world.
History teaches us something important. Alliances endure not through sentiment but through seriousness. They
thrive when nations are confident, selfreliant, and clear-eyed about the future
challenges before them.
Today, I want to speak about the renewal of the West and how that renewal reflects the best traditions of
American diplomacy and traditions
embodied by some of our greatest Secretaries of State: John Quincy Adams,
William Seward, George Marshall, and
James Baker.
Each faced a fractured world, each
acted boldly, and each understood that
American strength, wisely applied,
could shape a more stable international order.
The United States is a nation born in
the European political tradition. Our
constitutional order, our philosophy of
rights, and our understanding of sovereignty all trace their roots back to
this continent. When we say America
and Europe belong together, we are not
describing a temporary security arrangement. We are acknowledging a
shared inheritance.
However, shared heritage does not
excuse complacency. The lesson of the
last several decades is clear: Alliances
weaken when economic foundations
erode, when clear defense burdens fall
unevenly, and when world leaders avoid
hard conversations. A renewal of our
alliance requires candid, honest conversations.
In what form will those conversations take?
Secretary Rubio started that conversation in Munich. As a history
teacher myself, I trust we will look to
actions taken by some of our finest
Secretaries of State when they served
both their President and our Nation.
John Quincy Adams: After the War of
1812, John Quincy Adams recognized
that America was fragile. The great
powers of Europe were reorganizing
themselves at the Congress of Vienna.
It would have been easy for the young

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.092

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2418

United States to be pulled into European alliances, and, unfortunately, European rivalries.
However, John Quincy Adams, a
former Massachusetts Senator and diplomat, who helped negotiate the Treaty of Ghent that ended the War of 1812,
understood something profound: American strength depended first on national independence and economic resilience, and, as George Washington
warned in his Farewell Address, away
from entangling alliances.
As Secretary of State of our fifth
President, James Monroe, Adams negotiated the Adams-Onis Treaty, securing
Florida, my home State, from Spain
and clarifying the American borders
along the Atlantic Ocean. Later in 1823,
he crafted what became known as the
Monroe Doctrine, a declaration that
the Western Hemisphere would not be
subject to European recolonization.
The lesson was that America should
not go abroad in search of monsters to
destroy, but neither should it allow
others to define our destiny.
That balance, strength without recklessness, independence without isolation, is deeply relevant today.
When we insist on fair trade, secure
supply chains, and reciprocal defense
commitments, we are not retreating
from the world. We are doing what
Adams did: ensuring that American
sovereignty underwrites American diplomacy.
William Seward, a former Governor
and United States Senator from the
State of New York, was appointed Secretary of State by his own political
rival, President Abraham Lincoln.
There Seward guided the United States
foreign policy during the Civil War and
adroitly kept Great Britain out of our
tragic conflict.
After the war in 1867, Seward approved the purchase of Alaska. While
his critics in the press mocked this as
Seward’s Folly, those critics would
soon be proven wrong.
Today, we know that acquisition was
strategic brilliance. Seward saw beyond immediate criticism. He understood geography, trade routes, and
long-term power competition. He expanded America’s footprint in ways
that would matter for generations to
come. He believed deeply in commercial expansion as a tool of diplomacy.
The lesson here is that great statesmanship requires the courage to invest
in long-term national power.
Today,
securing
critical
supply
chains, revitalizing domestic industry,
and preventing adversaries from dominating strategic industries is not economic nationalism for its own sake. It
is modern statecraft.
Seward understood that economic
strength is strategic strength.
General George Marshall led our
American military during World War II
as the United States Army Chief of
Staff. Though not in the direct field of
battle and thus not as well-known as
some of the famous generals and admirals of World War II, it was Marshall

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

whose strategic leadership in concert
with Franklin Delano Roosevelt proved
decisive in defeating both the Japanese
and the Germans in World War II.
Two years after the conclusion of the
war, President Harry Truman appointed this wartime leader as Secretary of State, our chief diplomat. As
Europe lay in ruins, the United States
could have turned inward. Instead,
Marshall proposed the European Recovery Program, what we know today as
the Marshall Plan.
The genius of Marshall was not charity. It was clarity. He recognized that
American prosperity required European stability. He understood that free
societies require functioning economies, and he insisted that the European nations take responsibility for designing their own recovery.
The Marshall Plan was not a blank
check. It was a partnership. Marshall
demanded coordination, reform, and seriousness from Europe. In return, the
United States invested heavily. Due to
these actions, nations on the brink,
like Greece, my home country, stayed
free, and NATO proved to be the alliance that blocked the evil of communism.
b 1840
The
lesson?
Strength
begets
strength. When we call today for greater European defense spending, for fairer trade balances, and to bring industry home, we are echoing Marshall’s insistence that a partnership must be reciprocated.
Secretary of State James Baker. In
the final years of the Cold War, James
Baker navigated one of the most delicate diplomatic transformations in
modern history. After serving as chief
of staff and later Secretary of the
Treasury under Ronald Reagan, Baker
served as Secretary of State under
George H.W. Bush.
During this time when the Berlin
Wall fell, Germany reunified, and the
Soviet Union collapsed, these circumstances, these changes could have
triggered chaos. Instead, through disciplined diplomacy, Baker helped manage NATO expansion, reassured allies,
and negotiated arms control arrangements that prevented instability.
Baker’s approach was pragmatic, not
ideological. He listened. He negotiated
firmly. He protected American interests while recognizing the dignity of
other nations.
The lesson here? Diplomacy must
adapt to new realities.
The institutions built after World
War II were vital, but institutions cannot become frozen monuments. They
must evolve to address new forms of
economic competition, technological
disruption, and geopolitical rivalries.
Reform is not rejection, it is preservation through adaptation.
Today, in conclusion, we confront the
issues highlighted by our Secretary of
State, Marco Rubio: economic fragmentation, technological competition,
supply chain vulnerability, military
imbalances, and political polarization.

PO 00000

Frm 00046

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

The temptation too often is denial or
even an overreaction, but the better
path, the Adams path, the Seward
path, the Marshall path, the Baker
path, and hopefully the Rubio path
that we can follow is disciplined renewal.
That means restoring industrial capacity, ensuring defense reciprocity,
reforming global institutions rather
than abandoning them, and maintaining alliance unity grounded in sovereignty.
When we call on Europe to invest
more in its own defense, we are not
weakening NATO, we are strengthening NATO.
When we insist on true fair trade
that does not hollow out our middle
class, we are strengthening democratic
legitimacy.
When we call for reform in global institutions, we are ensuring that they
reflect the realities of 2026, not 1945.
Each of these Secretaries of State
that I have highlighted understood
something enduring: America must be
strong at home to be credible abroad.
Adams secured borders, Seward expanded territory, Marshall built alliances, and Baker managed transition.
None confused cooperation with dependency. None confused sovereignty
with isolation. The United States remained committed to Europe, but commitment does not mean complacency.
It means candid conversations about
defense spending. It means honest assessments about economic policy. It
means joint responsibility for the future of Western civilization.
We stand at the threshold of what
can be the new century of Western
strength if we choose seriousness, not
political correctness. The West succeeded in the 20th century because it
combined economic dynamism, military preparedness, cultural confidence,
and institutional flexibility. Those
traits must define us again. The path
forward is not nostalgia, it is renewal.
When future historians look back at
this moment, they will ask: Did we retreat from our responsibilities? Did we
allow economic complacency to erode
democratic stability? Did we allow alliances to drift into imbalance or did we
act with the clarity of John Quincy
Adams, with the foresight of William
Seward, with the strategic generosity
of George Marshall, and with the disciplined diplomacy of James Baker?
The answer depends on whether we
remember the core principle that
unites them all: American diplomacy
works best when it combines strength,
reciprocity, and long-term vision.
The United States and Europe belong
together, but belonging together requires effort from both sides. Let us rebuild industrial strength. Let us renew
defense commitments. Let us reform
institutions, and let us move forward
together. Let us do so with the vigor
worthy of the statesmen who came before us and now the vision offered by
our United States Secretary of State
Marco Rubio and our President of the
United States, Donald J. Trump.

E:\CR\FM\K04MR7.093

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

ENROLLED BILLS SIGNED
Kevin F. McCumber, Clerk of the
House, reported and found truly enrolled bills of the House of the following titles, which were thereupon
signed by the Speaker:
H.R. 972. An act to amend the Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area Act to adjust the boundary of the Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area, and for other purposes.
H.R. 2815. An act to provide equitable
treatment for the people of the Village Corporation established for the Native Village of
Saxman, Alaska, and for other purposes.
f

ADJOURNMENT
Mr. HARIDOPOLOS. Mr. Speaker, I
move that the House do now adjourn.
The motion was agreed to; accordingly (at 6 o’clock and 46 minutes
p.m.), under its previous order, the
House adjourned until tomorrow,
Thursday, March 5, 2026, at 10 a.m. for
morning-hour debate.
f

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS
Under clause 2 of rule XII, public
bills and resolutions of the following
titles were introduced and severally referred, as follows:
By Ms. UNDERWOOD:
H.R. 7782. A bill to prohibit the Secretary
of State from charging a fee for the issuance
or reissuance of a passport card; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Ms. MCCLELLAN (for herself and
Mr. OBERNOLTE):
H.R. 7783. A bill to direct the Assistant
Secretary of Commerce for Communications
and Information to publish a report on the
integration of artificial intelligence into the
commercial telecommunications infrastructure of the United States, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Ms. TITUS:
H.R. 7784. A bill to amend title 49, United
States Code, to establish requirements regarding visual and automated track inspections, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
By Mrs. BEATTY:
H.R. 7785. A bill to improve accountability
and training for Immigration and Customs
Enforcement; to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee on
Homeland Security, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each
case for consideration of such provisions as
fall within the jurisdiction of the committee
concerned.
By Mr. BUCHANAN (for himself and
Mr. SOTO):
H.R. 7786. A bill to establish protections
against digital impersonation fraud, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce, and in addition to the Committees on the Judiciary, Science, Space,
and Technology, and Foreign Affairs, for a
period to be subsequently determined by the
Speaker, in each case for consideration of
such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Mr. CARTER of Louisiana (for himself, Mr. TURNER of Ohio, Mr. MCCORMICK, and Ms. CLARKE of New York):
H.R. 7787. A bill to amend title VII of the
Public Health Service Act to strengthen the
mental health workforce, and for other pur-

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

H2419

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

poses; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Ms. ELFRETH (for herself, Mr.
OLSZEWSKI, Mr. MFUME, and Mr.
RASKIN):
H.R. 7788. A bill to authorize the Chesapeake Bay Program Office to serve as a
member of certain State watershed programs, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
By Mr. FINSTAD (for himself and Mr.
KRISHNAMOORTHI):
H.R. 7789. A bill to authorize the creation
of ‘‘Lending.gov’’ as a shared services platform to provide a single source of access to
loans provided by Federal agencies, and modern technology to support effective management of Federal credit programs, in order to
reduce costs, prevent fraud, increase the
speed of origination, improve transparency,
improve access and customer experience, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform.
By Mr. FOSTER (for himself and Mrs.
BEATTY):
H.R. 7790. A bill to amend the HITECH Act
to allow an individual to obtain a copy of
such individual’s protected health information at no cost unless certain circumstances
apply, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce.
By Mr. HARDER of California (for himself and Mr. KELLY of Pennsylvania):
H.R. 7791. A bill to authorize the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development to
prioritize the award of certain housing
grants to applicants located in, or serving,
low-income communities; to the Committee
on Financial Services.
By Mr. HIMES (for himself, Mr.
PAPPAS, Mr. HARDER of California,
and Mr. LICCARDO):
H.R. 7792. A bill to amend title I of the National Housing Act to increase the loan limits and clarify that property improvement
loans may be used for construction of accessory dwelling units; to the Committee on Financial Services.
By Mrs. HOUCHIN (for herself, Mr.
FONG, and Mr. OBERNOLTE):
H.R. 7793. A bill to prohibit the issuance of
commercial driver’s licenses to individuals
who are not citizens or lawful permanent
residents of the United States or holders of
certain work visas, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure.
By Mr. KENNEDY of Utah:
H.R. 7794. A bill to amend the Child Care
and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 to
provide transparency and accountability in
the administration of Federal child care
funds expended by the States; to the Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Ms. KING-HINDS:
H.R. 7795. A bill to require the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs to establish and maintain a
database of certified veteran-owned small
businesses and service-disabled veteranowned small businesses to assist the Department of Veterans Affairs in meeting its subcontracting goals, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs.
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7796. A bill to assist communities affected by stranded nuclear waste, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, and in addition
to the Committees on Financial Services,
and Ways and Means, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. MENENDEZ:
H.R. 7797. A bill to provide certain requirements and guidance relating to license plate

PO 00000

Frm 00047

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

readability, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, and in addition to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin (for herself, Ms. SCHOLTEN, and Ms. GARCIA of
Texas):
H.R. 7798. A bill to amend the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act of 1965 to provide grants to hire and retain school social
workers, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Mr. MORAN:
H.R. 7799. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide that 501(c)(3) organizations are liable for the use of funding
provided as a fiscal sponsor; to the Committee on Ways and Means.
By Mr. MORAN (for himself and Mr.
VAN ORDEN):
H.R. 7800. A bill to establish the White
House Council on Fathers and Sons, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Mr. OBERNOLTE (for himself, Mr.
KHANNA, Mr. AUCHINCLOSS, and Mr.
MCCORMICK):
H.R. 7801. A bill to require the Director of
the National Science Foundation to carry
out a cloud laboratory network program, and
for other purposes; to the Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology.
By Mr. PAPPAS (for himself, Mr.
RASKIN, Mr. MORELLE, Mr. AMO, Ms.
BALINT, Ms. BARRAGÁN, Mrs. BEATTY,
Mr.
BISHOP,
Ms.
Mr.
BERA,
Ms.
BUDZINSKI,
Mr.
BROWNLEY,
CARBAJAL, Mr. CARSON, Mr. CARTER
of Louisiana, Mr. CASAR, Mr. CASE,
Mr. CASTEN, Ms. CASTOR of Florida,
Mr. CASTRO of Texas, Mr. CLEAVER,
Mr. COHEN, Ms. CRAIG, Ms. CROCKETT,
Mr. CROW, Ms. DAVIDS of Kansas, Mr.
DAVIS of Illinois, Ms. DEAN of PennMs.
sylvania,
Ms.
DEGETTE,
DELAURO, Ms. DELBENE, Mr. DELUZIO,
Mr. DESAULNIER, Ms. DEXTER, Mrs.
DINGELL, Mr. DOGGETT, Ms. ELFRETH,
Ms. ESCOBAR, Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania, Mrs. FLETCHER, Mrs. FOUSHEE,
Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida, Mr.
FROST, Mr. GARAMENDI, Mr. GARCIA
of California, Ms. GARCIA of Texas,
Mr. GOLDEN of Maine, Mr. GOLDMAN
of New York, Mr. GOMEZ, Ms.
GOODLANDER, Mr. GOTTHEIMER, Mr.
GREEN of Texas, Mr. HARDER of California, Mr. HERNÁNDEZ, Mr. HIMES,
Ms. HOULAHAN, Mr. HOYER, Ms.
HOYLE of Oregon, Mr. HUFFMAN, Mr.
IVEY, Mr. JACKSON of Illinois, Mr.
JOHNSON of Georgia, Ms. KAMLAGERDOVE, Mr. KEATING, Ms. KELLY of Illinois, Mr. KENNEDY of New York, Mr.
KHANNA, Mr. KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mr.
LANDSMAN, Mr. LARSEN of Washington, Mr. LARSON of Connecticut,
Ms. LEE of Nevada, Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania, Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ, Mr.
LEVIN, Mr. LIEU, Ms. LOFGREN, Mr.
LYNCH, Mr. MAGAZINER, Mr. MANNION,
Ms. MATSUI, Ms. MCBRIDE, Mrs.
MCCLAIN DELANEY, Ms. MCCLELLAN,
Ms. MCCOLLUM, Mr. MCGOVERN, Mrs.
MCIVER, Ms. MENG, Mr. MIN, Mr.
Mr.
MOULTON,
Mr.
MOSKOWITZ,
MULLIN, Mr. NADLER, Mr. NEGUSE,
Ms. NORTON, Mr. OLSZEWSKI, Mr. PANETTA, Ms. PELOSI, Mr. PETERS, Ms.
PETTERSEN, Mr. POCAN, Mr. QUIGLEY,
Mrs. RAMIREZ, Ms. RANDALL, Ms.
ROSS, Ms. SALINAS, Ms. SCANLON, Ms.
SCHAKOWSKY, Mr. SCHNEIDER, Ms.

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.029

H04MRPT1

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H2420

SCHOLTEN, Mr. DAVID SCOTT of Georgia, Mr. SCOTT of Virginia, Ms. SEWELL, Mr. SHERMAN, Ms. SIMON, Mr.
of
Washington,
Ms.
SMITH
STANSBURY, Mr. STANTON, Ms. STEVENS, Ms. STRICKLAND, Mr. SUOZZI,
Mr. SWALWELL, Mr. TAKANO, Mr.
THANEDAR, Ms. TITUS, Ms. TLAIB, Ms.
TOKUDA, Mr. TONKO, Mrs. TORRES of
California, Mrs. TRAHAN, Ms. UNDERWOOD, Mr. VARGAS, Mr. VEASEY, Mr.
WALKINSHAW, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN,
Ms. WILSON of Florida, Mrs. MCBATH,
Mr. COSTA, Mr. TORRES of New York,
and Ms. BONAMICI):
H.R. 7802. A bill to amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to provide for additional disclosure requirements for corporations, labor organizations, Super PACs and
other entities, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on House Administration, and in
addition to the Committees on Ways and
Means, and the Judiciary, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. POCAN (for himself, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY, Mr. KHANNA, Mr. COHEN, Ms.
DELAURO, Mr. DELUZIO, Mr. DOGGETT,
Mr. FROST, Mr. GOLDMAN of New
York, Ms. NORTON, Ms. JAYAPAL, Mr.
JOHNSON of Georgia, Mr. LANDSMAN,
Ms. MENG, Ms. OCASIO-CORTEZ, Ms.
OMAR, and Ms. TLAIB):
H.R. 7803. A bill to rename the program
under part C of title XVIII of the Social Security Act, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within
the jurisdiction of the committee concerned.
By Ms. PRESSLEY (for herself and Ms.
LEE of Pennsylvania):
H.R. 7804. A bill to direct the Secretary of
Labor to perform additional duties, to modernize certain laws regarding the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, and for other purposes; to
the Committee on Education and Workforce.
By Ms. SÁNCHEZ (for herself, Mr.
MCGARVEY, Mr. NEAL, Mr. DOGGETT,
Mr. THOMPSON of California, Mr. LARSON of Connecticut, Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Ms. SEWELL, Ms. DELBENE, Ms.
CHU, Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin, Mr.
BOYLE of Pennsylvania, Mr. BEYER,
Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania, Mr.
SCHNEIDER, Mr. PANETTA, Mr. GOMEZ,
Mr. HORSFORD, Ms. PLASKETT, and
Mr. SUOZZI):
H.R. 7805. A bill to reauthorize Trade Adjustment Assistance programs, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Ways and
Means.
By Mr. SHERMAN (for himself, Mr.
BEYER, Mr. HOYER, Ms. CHU, Mr.
POCAN, Mr. AGUILAR, Mr. AMO, Ms.
ADAMS, Ms. BALINT, Ms. BARRAGÁN,
Mrs. BEATTY, Ms. BONAMICI, Ms.
BROWNLEY, Mr. CARSON, Mr. CASTEN,
of
Florida,
Mrs.
Ms.
CASTOR
CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK, Mr. CISNEROS,
Ms. CLARKE of New York, Mr. COHEN,
Mr. CONAWAY, Mr. COSTA, Mr. DAVIS
of Illinois, Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania,
Ms. DEGETTE, Ms. DELAURO, Ms.
DELBENE, Mr. DELUZIO, Ms. DEXTER,
Mr. DOGGETT, Ms. ELFRETH, Mr.
FIELDS, Mrs. FLETCHER, Mr. FOSTER,
Mrs. FOUSHEE, Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of
Florida, Ms. FRIEDMAN, Mr. FROST,
Mr. GARAMENDI, Mr. GARCIA of California, Ms. GARCIA of Texas, Mr.
GARCÍA of Illinois, Mr. GOLDMAN of
New York, Mr. GOMEZ, Mr. GREEN of
Texas, Mrs. GRIJALVA, Mr. HARDER of

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

California, Mrs. HAYES, Mr. HIMES,
Mr. HORSFORD, Ms. HOULAHAN, Mr.
HUFFMAN, Mr. IVEY, Ms. JACOBS, Ms.
JAYAPAL, Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia,
Ms. KELLY of Illinois, Mr. KENNEDY of
Mr.
New
York,
Mr.
KHANNA,
LANDSMAN, Mr. LARSEN of Washington, Mr. LATIMER, Ms. LEE of
Mr.
Pennsylvania,
Mr.
LYNCH,
MANNION, Ms. MATSUI, Ms. MCBRIDE,
Mrs. MCCLAIN DELANEY, Ms. MCCLELLAN, Ms. MCCOLLUM, Ms. MCDONALD
RIVET, Mr. MCGOVERN, Mrs. MCIVER,
Mr. MENENDEZ, Mr. MFUME, Mr.
MOULTON, Mr. MULLIN, Ms. NORTON,
Ms. OCASIO-CORTEZ, Mr. OLSZEWSKI,
Ms. OMAR, Mr. PALLONE, Ms. PINGREE, Ms. PRESSLEY, Mr. QUIGLEY,
Mrs. RAMIREZ, Ms. RANDALL, Mr.
RASKIN, Ms. SALINAS, Ms. SÁNCHEZ,
Ms. SCANLON, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY, Ms.
SCHRIER, Mr. SCOTT of Virginia, Mr.
DAVID SCOTT of Georgia, Ms. SIMON,
Mr. SMITH of Washington, Mr. SOTO,
Ms. STANSBURY, Mr. SWALWELL, Mr.
TAKANO, Mr. THANEDAR, Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi, Ms. TITUS, Ms.
TLAIB, Ms. TOKUDA, Mr. TONKO, Mrs.
TRAHAN, Mr. SUOZZI, Mr. TORRES of
New York, Mr. VARGAS, Mr. VEASEY,
Ms. VELÁZQUEZ, Mr. VINDMAN, Mr.
Ms.
WASSERMAN
WALKINSHAW,
SCHULTZ, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN, Ms.
of
Georgia,
Mr.
WILLIAMS
Mr.
CORREA,
Mr.
DESAULNIER,
SUBRAMANYAM, and Ms. MENG):
H.R. 7806. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to codify the Direct File
program; to the Committee on Ways and
Means.
By Mr. SMITH of New Jersey (for himself, Ms. SALAZAR, Mr. HARRIS of
Maryland, and Mr. WILSON of South
Carolina):
H.R. 7807. A bill to authorize the Foreign
Claims Settlement Commission of the
United States to process claims against the
Government of Honduras related to the expropriation of property of United States persons; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. SMUCKER (for himself, Mr.
GOLDEN of Maine, Mr. CLINE, Ms.
PEREZ, Mr. YAKYM, Mr. SUOZZI, Mr.
BACON, Mr. MEUSER, Mr. PANETTA,
Mr. GROTHMAN, Mr. PETERS, and Mr.
DAVIS of North Carolina):
H.R. 7808. A bill to require that the President’s annual budget submission to Congress
and any concurrent resolution on the budget
include the ratio of the public debt to the estimated gross domestic product of the
United States, and for other purposes; to the
Committee on the Budget, and in addition to
the Committee on Rules, for a period to be
subsequently determined by the Speaker, in
each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the
committee concerned.
By Mr. TAYLOR (for himself, Mr.
LANDSMAN, Mr. JORDAN, Mr. LATTA,
Mr. RULLI, Mr. MILLER of Ohio, Mr.
DAVIDSON, Mr. TURNER of Ohio, Ms.
BROWN, Mr. BALDERSON, Mr. JOYCE of
Ohio, and Mr. CAREY):
H.R. 7809. A bill to designate the facility of
the United States Postal Service located at
201 East Grant Avenue in Georgetown, Ohio,
as the ‘‘Ulysses S. Grant Post Office Building’’; to the Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform.
By Mr. THOMPSON of California (for
himself and Mr. MOYLAN):
H.R. 7810. A bill to amend the Higher Education Act of 1965 to set interest rates for
Federal student loans made on or after July
1, 2026, at 2 percent, and for other purposes;
to the Committee on Education and Workforce.

PO 00000

Frm 00048

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

By Ms. MALOY (for herself, Mr. OWENS,
Mr. MOORE of Utah, Mr. KENNEDY of
Utah, Mr. AMODEI of Nevada, Mr.
STAUBER, and Mr. BEGICH):
H.J. Res. 151. A joint resolution providing
for congressional disapproval under chapter 8
of title 5, United States Code, of the rule
submitted by the Bureau of Land Management relating to ‘‘Grand Staircase-Escalante
National Monument Record of Decision and
Approved Resource Management Plan’’; to
the Committee on Natural Resources.
By Mr. GOTTHEIMER (for himself, Mr.
LANDSMAN, Mr. CUELLAR, Mr. GOLDEN
of Maine, Mr. COSTA, Mr. PANETTA,
Mr. VICENTE GONZALEZ of Texas, Mr.
SUOZZI, and Mr. GRAY):
H. Con. Res. 75. Concurrent resolution directing the President, pursuant to section
5(c) of the War Powers Resolution, to remove
the United States Armed Forces from hostilities against the Islamic Republic of Iran;
to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Mr. MAST (for himself, Mrs.
HOUCHIN, and Mr. ISSA):
H. Res. 1099. A resolution reaffirming Iran
remains the largest state sponsor of terrorism; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
By Ms. MACE:
H. Res. 1100. A resolution directing the
Committee on Ethics to preserve and publicly release records of the Committee’s review of violations or alleged violations of
clause 9 (as it pertains to acts of sexual harassment) and clause 18 of rule XXIII of the
Rules of the House of Representatives.
By Mrs. LUNA:
H. Res. 1101. A resolution censuring Representative Tony Gonzales of Texas; to the
Committee on Ethics.
By Mrs. LUNA:
H. Res. 1102. A resolution removing Representative Tony Gonzalez of Texas from certain standing committees of the House of
Representatives; to the Committee on Ethics.
By Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin (for herself, Ms. SCHOLTEN, and Ms. GARCIA of
Texas):
H. Res. 1103. A resolution expressing support for the designation of the week beginning March 2, 2026, as ‘‘School Social Work
Week’’; to the Committee on Education and
Workforce.
By Ms. PEREZ:
H. Res. 1104. A resolution directing the Office of Congressional Conduct to establish
standards of conduct related to mental capacity of members of the House of Representatives; to the Committee on Ethics.
By Mr. THANEDAR:
H. Res. 1105. A resolution impeaching Pamela Jo Bondi, Attorney General of the United
States of America, for high crimes and misdemeanors; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
By Ms. WATERS (for herself, Ms.
CLARKE of New York, Mr. JEFFRIES,
Mr. JACKSON of Illinois, Mr. JOHNSON
of Georgia, Ms. NORTON, Ms. WILSON
of Florida, Ms. SEWELL, Ms. KELLY of
Illinois, Mr. IVEY, Ms. UNDERWOOD,
Mrs.
BEATTY,
Mrs.
Mr.
BELL,
CHERFILUS-MCCORMICK, Ms. SIMON,
Mr. FIELDS, Mr. FIGURES, Ms.
PRESSLEY, Mr. MENEFEE, Mr. BISHOP,
Mr. CLEAVER, Mr. DOGGETT, Mrs.
MCBATH, Mrs. MCIVER, Mrs. RAMIREZ,
Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE, Mr. CARTER of
Louisiana, Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin,
Ms. TLAIB, Mr. VEASEY, Ms. MCCLELLAN, Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Mr.
WALKINSHAW, Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania, Mr. LARSON of Connecticut,
Ms. BROWN, Ms. OMAR, Mr. CASTEN,
Ms. ADAMS, Ms. BUDZINSKI, Ms.
STRICKLAND, Ms. BARRAGÁN, Mr.
COHEN, Ms. DELBENE, Mr. SWALWELL,

E:\CR\FM\L04MR7.100

H04MRPT1

March 4, 2026

Mr. KENNEDY of New York, Mr.
QUIGLEY, Mr. CARSON, Mr. THANEDAR,
Ms. DELAURO, Mr. CLYBURN, Mr.
THOMPSON of Mississippi, Mr. EVANS
of Pennsylvania, Ms. MENG, Mr. PALLONE, Mr. HORSFORD, Ms. OCASIO-CORTEZ, Mr. MORELLE, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY,
of
Texas,
Mr.
Mr.
GREEN
KRISHNAMOORTHI, Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN, Mr. ESPAILLAT, Ms. DEAN of
Pennsylvania, Ms. ELFRETH, Mrs.
HAYES, Mrs. GRIJALVA, Mr. HOYER,
Mr. MCGARVEY, Ms. DEGETTE, Mr.
SCOTT of Virginia, Ms. RANDALL, Mr.
SCHNEIDER, Mr. CONAWAY, Mr. AMO,
and Mr. GARCÍA of Illinois):
H. Res. 1106. A resolution honoring the life
and legacy of Rev. Jesse Louis Jackson, Sr;
to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform.
f

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY
STATEMENT
Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of
the Rules of the House of Representatives, the following statements are submitted regarding the specific powers
granted to Congress in the Constitution to enact the accompanying bill or
joint resolution.
By Ms. UNDERWOOD:
H.R. 7782.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution
By Ms. MCCLELLAN:
H.R. 7783.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8
By Ms. TITUS:
H.R. 7784.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mrs. BEATTY:
H.R. 7785.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mr. BUCHANAN:
H.R. 7786.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, section 8.
By Mr. CARTER of Louisiana:
H.R. 7787.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
General Welfare Clause (Art. 1 Sec. 8 Cl. 1),
and the Necessary and Proper Clause (Art 1
Sec. 8 Cl. 18)
By Ms. ELFRETH:
H.R. 7788.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Necessary and Proper Clause (Art. 1, Sec. 8,
Cl. 18)
By Mr. FINSTAD:
H.R. 7789.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. FOSTER:
H.R. 7790.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
This bill is enacted pursuant to the power
granted to Congress under Article I, Section
8 of the United States Constitution.
By Mr. HARDER of California:
H.R. 7791.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

H2421

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

Jkt 069060

Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8
By Mr. HIMES:
H.R. 7792.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
clause 1 of section 8 of article I of the Constitution
By Mrs. HOUCHIN:
H.R. 7793.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. KENNEDY of Utah:
H.R. 7794.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, Clause 18
By Ms. KING-HINDS:
H.R. 7795.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the United States
Constitution
By Mr. LAWLER:
H.R. 7796.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 1 of the U.S. Constitution
By Mr. MENENDEZ:
H.R. 7797.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Clause 8
By Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin:
H.R. 7798.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Congress is established by Article I of the
U.S. Constitution. This article vests all legislative powers in Congress, which consists
of a Senate and a House of Representatives.
By Mr. MORAN:
H.R. 7799.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. MORAN:
H.R. 7800.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8
By Mr. OBERNOLTE:
H.R. 7801.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8.
By Mr. PAPPAS:
H.R. 7802.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 18
By Mr. POCAN:
H.R. 7803.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution.
By Ms. PRESSLEY:
H.R. 7804.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Art. 1 Sec. 8 Clause 18
By Ms. SÁNCHEZ:
H.R. 7805.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I, Section 8, clause 1 of the Constitution.
By Mr. SHERMAN:
H.R. 7806.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution
providing Congress with the power to lay and
collect taxes.
By Mr. SMITH of New Jersey:
H.R. 7807.

PO 00000

Frm 00049

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article I Section 8 of the US Constitution
By Mr. SMUCKER:
H.R. 7808.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Section VIII of Article I of the U.S. Constitution
By Mr. TAYLOR:
H.R. 7809.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
By Mr. THOMPSON of California:
H.R. 7810.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1, Section 8, Clause 18
By Ms. MALOY:
H.J. Res. 151.
Congress has the power to enact this legislation pursuant to the following:
Article 1 Section 8
f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS
Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors
were added to public bills and resolutions, as follows:
H.R. 251: Mr. BABIN.
H.R. 336: Mr. FITZPATRICK.
H.R. 347: Mr. TIMMONS and Mr. COSTA.
H.R. 507: Mr. MACKENZIE.
H.R. 516: Ms. WILSON of Florida.
H.R. 539: Ms. SÁNCHEZ.
H.R. 722: Mr. DESJARLAIS and Mr. JOHNSON
of South Dakota.
H.R. 740: Mr. OBERNOLTE.
H.R. 783: Mr. KEATING.
H.R. 885: Mr. MOORE of Alabama.
H.R. 928: Mr. BRESNAHAN and Mr. SOTO.
H.R. 1227: Mr. GARBARINO.
H.R. 1229: Ms. CASTOR of Florida.
H.R. 1241: Mr. ESTES and Mr. BABIN.
H.R. 1346: Mrs. HOUCHIN.
H.R. 1464: Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 1542: Mr. VARGAS.
H.R. 1628: Mr. FLOOD, Mrs. BIGGS of South
Carolina, and Mr. SMITH of Nebraska.
H.R. 1657: Ms. DELAURO.
H.R. 1845: Ms. DELBENE and Mr. FITZGERALD.
H.R. 1965: Mr. OWENS.
H.R. 2033: Mr. STAUBER.
H.R. 2086: Mrs. BEATTY, Ms. SCHAKOWSKY,
Mr. VEASEY, Mr. LANDSMAN, Ms. DELBENE,
Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina, and Ms. ROSS.
H.R. 2089: Ms. LEE of Nevada and Mr.
EVANS of Colorado.
H.R. 2257: Mr. SHREVE.
H.R. 2307: Mr. SMITH of Nebraska.
H.R. 2315: Mr. BABIN.
H.R. 2348: Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.R. 2385: Ms. LEE of Nevada.
H.R. 2470: Mr. CLEAVER.
H.R. 2491: Mr. BACON.
H.R. 2506: Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 2507: Mrs. GRIJALVA.
H.R. 2512: Mr. MANNION.
H.R. 2531: Ms. JOHNSON of Texas and Mr.
TAKANO.
H.R. 2581: Mr. MOORE of Alabama.
H.R. 2691: Mr. NORMAN.
H.R. 2696: Mr. SWALWELL.
H.R. 2705: Mr. BABIN.
H.R. 2729: Ms. SCHOLTEN.
H.R. 2850: Mr. MOULTON.
H.R. 3045: Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN.
H.R. 3089: Mr. MACKENZIE and Mr.
CISNEROS.
H.R. 3277: Mr. LIEU and Ms. SCANLON.
H.R. 3404: Mr. MACKENZIE.
H.R. 3452: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 3514: Mr. TONY GONZALES of Texas.
H.R. 3608: Mr. MOORE of Alabama.

E:\CR\FM\L04MR7.100

H04MRPT1

H2422

dmwilson on DSK7X7S144PROD with HOUSE

H.R. 3712: Mr. THOMPSON of California.
H.R. 3723: Mr. JACKSON of Texas.
H.R. 3740: Mr. LANDSMAN.
H.R. 3784: Mr. SUOZZI and Ms. SCHRIER.
H.R. 3954: Mr. MEUSER and Mr. RASKIN.
H.R. 3983: Mr. OBERNOLTE.
H.R. 4146: Mr. HARRIGAN.
H.R. 4206: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 4306: Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 4568: Mr. RILEY of New York and Mrs.
KIM.
H.R. 4575: Mr. MCGUIRE.
H.R. 4606: Mrs. TRAHAN.
H.R. 4620: Mrs. KIM.
H.R. 4669: Mr. VAN DREW, Mr. STAUBER, and
Mr. HURD of Colorado.
H.R. 4682: Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 4716: Mr. MOORE of Utah.
H.R. 4827: Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 4829: Mr. SUOZZI.
H.R. 4837: Mr. GROTHMAN and Mr. FITZGERALD.
H.R. 4935: Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina.
H.R. 4936: Mr. TIMMONS.
H.R. 4966: Mr. NORCROSS.
H.R. 5271: Mr. CORREA, Ms. MENG, and Mr.
BERA.
H.R. 5390: Ms. LEE of Nevada.
H.R. 5475: Mr. MILLER of Ohio and Mr.
GARAMENDI.
H.R. 5476: Mr. FOSTER.
H.R. 5490: Mr. BOST.
H.R. 5509: Mrs. KIM, Ms. OMAR, Mr. CONAWAY, Mrs. SYKES, Mr. SHERMAN, Ms. MOORE
of Wisconsin, Mr. EZELL, and Mr. TONKO.
H.R. 5621: Mr. COHEN and Mr. QUIGLEY.
H.R. 5870: Mr. FLEISCHMANN.
H.R. 5875: Mr. MANNION.
H.R. 5936: Mrs. LUNA.
H.R. 5940: Mr. DESAULNIER.
H.R. 5966: Mr. MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 6047: Mr. CRANK.
H.R. 6086: Mr. CARTER of Georgia and Mr.
THANEDAR.
H.R. 6128: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 6137: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 6162: Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ.
H.R. 6182: Mr. IVEY.
H.R. 6222: Mr. MAGAZINER.
H.R. 6228: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 6231: Mr. LALOTA and Mrs. MCBATH.

VerDate Sep 11 2014

March 4, 2026

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE

07:30 Mar 05, 2026

Jkt 069060

H.R. 6233: Mr. MOORE of Alabama.
H.R. 6280: Mr. RASKIN, Mr. GOTTHEIMER,
Mr. BILIRAKIS, Ms. DELBENE, Mr. LAWLER,
Mr. SWALWELL, and Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 6283: Ms. JAYAPAL.
H.R. 6373: Mrs. KIM.
H.R. 6383: Mrs. KIM.
H.R. 6391: Ms. LOFGREN.
H.R. 6423: Mr. COHEN.
H.R. 6425: Mr. SORENSEN.
H.R. 6440: Mr. BERA.
H.R. 6444: Mr. STAUBER.
H.R. 6534: Mr. HAMADEH of Arizona.
H.R. 6617: Ms. NORTON.
H.R. 6672: Ms. BALINT.
H.R. 6677: Mr. CARBAJAL.
H.R. 6766: Mr. KELLY of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 6799: Mr. CLEAVER.
H.R. 6806: Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi.
H.R. 6858: Mr. OWENS.
H.R. 6866: Mr. QUIGLEY.
H.R. 6875: Mr. TAYLOR.
H.R. 6900: Ms. MCCLELLAN.
H.R. 6976: Mr. AUSTIN SCOTT of Georgia,
Ms. MOORE of Wisconsin, Ms. DELAURO, and
Mr. ROGERS of Kentucky.
H.R. 6989: Mrs. GRIJALVA and Ms.
BUDZINSKI.
H.R. 6998: Ms. KING-HINDS.
H.R. 7033: Mr. MILLER of Ohio.
H.R. 7094: Ms. BROWNLEY.
H.R. 7095: Ms. BROWNLEY.
H.R. 7100: Mr. CARSON.
H.R. 7146: Mr. SWALWELL.
H.R. 7159: Mrs. MILLER of West Virginia.
H.R. 7184: Mr. DUNN of Florida.
H.R. 7223: Mr. CARSON, Mrs. FLETCHER, Mr.
CASE, and Mr. KHANNA.
H.R. 7230: Mrs. KIM.
H.R. 7251: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 7300: Mr. EZELL.
H.R. 7333: Ms. ELFRETH and Ms. KINGHINDS.
H.R. 7354: Mrs. FOUSHEE.
H.R. 7380: Ms. OMAR.
H.R. 7390: Mr. KEAN.
H.R. 7398: Mr. TRAN.
H.R. 7417: Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia.
H.R. 7450: Mr. MAST.
H.R. 7459: Mr. KELLY of Pennsylvania.

PO 00000

Frm 00050

Fmt 4634

Sfmt 0634

H.R. 7481: Ms. BUDZINSKI, Mr. CONAWAY, Ms.
DELBENE, Ms. JAYAPAL, Ms. MATSUI, Mr.
SUOZZI, and Ms. SALINAS.
H.R. 7521: Ms. SCHAKOWSKY.
H.R. 7548: Mrs. KIM and Ms. FRIEDMAN.
H.R. 7581: Ms. HOYLE of Oregon.
H.R. 7592: Mr. GILL of Texas.
H.R. 7601: Mr. LEVIN.
H.R. 7602: Mr. SUOZZI and Mr. ONDER.
H.R. 7613: Mr. FINSTAD and Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 7618: Ms. LEE of Nevada.
H.R. 7640: Ms. HAGEMAN.
H.R. 7645: Mr. THOMPSON of Mississippi and
Mr. FOSTER.
H.R. 7647: Mr. VINDMAN.
H.R. 7651: Mr. HIGGINS of Louisiana, Mrs.
HARSHBARGER, Mr. MESSMER, and Mr.
STUTZMAN.
H.R. 7652: Mr. THANEDAR.
H.R. 7677: Ms. LETLOW.
H.R. 7687: Mr. GOLDMAN of Texas.
H.R. 7703: Mrs. KIM.
H.R. 7705: Mr. HUFFMAN.
H.R. 7709: Mr. EVANS of Pennsylvania.
H.R. 7722: Ms. LETLOW.
H.R. 7723: Ms. LETLOW.
H.R. 7766: Ms. ELFRETH.
H.J. Res. 144: Mr. DESAULNIER, Ms. CRAIG,
Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania, Mr. GOLDEN of
Maine, Mrs. GRIJALVA, Ms. KELLY of Illinois,
Mr. VASQUEZ, Ms. WILLIAMS of Georgia, Ms.
HOYLE of Oregon, Ms. MCBRIDE, and Mr.
VINDMAN.
H. Con. Res. 38: Mr. SUBRAMANYAM and Ms.
PELOSI.
H. Con. Res. 40: Mr. COHEN and Mr. STANTON.
H. Res. 176: Mr. SUOZZI.
H. Res. 317: Mr. IVEY.
H. Res. 657: Mr. MRVAN.
H. Res. 1028: Ms. OMAR.
H. Res. 1073: Mr. SHREVE.
H. Res. 1080: Ms. OMAR.
H. Res. 1086: Mr. GREEN of Texas.
H. Res. 1088: Ms. OMAR, Ms. BYNUM, Ms.
STANSBURY, Ms. STRICKLAND, and Mr.
KHANNA.
H. Res. 1098: Ms. POU.

E:\CR\FM\A04MR7.005

H04MRPT1

