
Foreign Assistance: Opportunities Exist for Agencies to Improve Their Management of Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Risks | U.S. GAO
 Skip to main content
U.S. Government Accountability Office
Menu
Reports & Testimonies
Reports & Testimonies
Recommendations Database
Month in Review
Order Copies
Restricted Reports
View Topics
View Agencies
Bid Protests & Appropriations Law
Bid Protests & Appropriations Law
Bid Protests
Appropriations Law
Federal Vacancies Reform Act
Congressional Review Act
Other Legal
About
About
What GAO Does
U.S. Comptroller General
Careers
Contact Us
For Congress
Press Center
Careers
Blog
Breadcrumb
Home
Reports & Testimonies
Foreign Assistance: Opportunities Exist For Agencies To Improve Their Management of Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Risks
 Foreign Assistance:
Opportunities Exist for Agencies to Improve Their Management of Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Risks
GAO-26-108945
 Published: Mar 17, 2026. Publicly Released: Mar 17, 2026.
 Jump To: 
Jump To
Elder Abuse
Services for Older Adults
State and Local-Level Drivers and Trends
State and Local Fiscal Projections
Federal Borrowing
Managing the Debt
Summary of Funding Provisions
Auditing the Government's Books
Unpacking the Financial Report
Highlights
Recommendations
Background
About This Work
About This Work
Topics
Trends
About the Center
Why It's High Risk
What Remains To Be Done
Key Reports
Newest COVID-Related Reports
AI Use Cases
Flood Insurance
Past Pandemic-Related Reports
CARES Act Oversight Reports
All COVID-19 Reports
Report Suspected Fraud
Subjects
How to Get Notified
Past Reports
Public Health Threats
Explore the FY 2022 and 2023 Funds
Status of FY22 Projects
Lessons Learned
Agency Reports
Recent Reports
Recommendations
Supplemental Material
Full Report
Additional Data
View Decision
Downloads
Previously Identified Actions
Related Pages
Associated Agencies
Tough Choices and Opportunities Ahead
Americas Fiscal Future Key Areas
Retirement Security Key Areas
Current List
About The High Risk List
Area Ratings
Previous High Risk Products
Search Federal Vacancies
Past Federal Vacancies
Violation Letters
About the Yellow Book
Related Resources
Comment Letters
Related Publications
Contacts and Resources
Major Issues Facing the Nation
Meeting Strategic Challenges
Additional Resources
About the Green Book
Resources
Advisory Council
Mission Teams
Operations and Staff Offices 
Organization Chart 
Why a Career at GAO?
Am I Qualified?
Company Culture
Reasonable Accommodations
Video Gallery
Paid Internships
Student Volunteers
Professional Development Program
Advancement
Executive Candidate Program
Summer Associates
Externships
Benefits
Contacts
Priority Open Recommendation Letters
Key Resources
Major Issues
Downloadable Resources
How Could Federal Debt Affect You?
GAO Contacts
Drivers
Interest
Sustainability
What Needs to Be Done?
Technology Assessments
Science & Tech Spotlights
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Related Reports
Performance Audits
Blogs
Multimedia
Podcasts
Videos
Career Highlights
Tribute Videos & Statements
Testimonies
Presentations
Forums & Roundtables
Fast Facts
Foreign Assistance: Opportunities Exist for Agencies to Improve Their Management of Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Risks
We testified on fraud risk management in foreign assistance before the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Intelligence.
This testimony is based on several GAO reports, including:
Foreign Assistance: USAID Should Strengthen Risk Management in Conflict Zone
Ukraine: State and USAID Should Improve Processes for Ensuring Partners Can Perform Required Work
U.S. African Development Foundation: Strategic Approach Needed to Mitigate Fraud Risks
We’ve made recommendations and shared lessons learned related to managing fraud risk in foreign aid. Federal agencies have addressed some of our recommendations but still need to address others.
U.S. Capital Building
Skip to Highlights
Highlights
What GAO Found
No area of the federal government is immune to fraud, waste, or abuse. GAO estimates that the federal government loses between $233 billion and $521 billion annually to fraud, based on 2018-2022 data. Delivering foreign assistance can involve specific challenges that increase fraud, waste and abuse risks, such as the presence of conflict in a country and the urgency of providing life-saving aid. GAO’s work in this area has highlighted several instances of actual and potential fraud, waste, and abuse in foreign assistance in countries such as Somalia, Afghanistan, and Mexico. For example, GAO reported on a 2023 United Nations assessment in Somalia that found widespread and systemic diversion of aid, primarily cash assistance. As part of this diversion, beneficiaries reported being required or coerced into paying a significant portion of their aid to those managing the camps where the assistance was distributed, or others.
Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Definitions and Examples
GAO’s work has identified useful practices and controls in place to manage fraud risks at some agencies. For example, U.S. Agency for International Development’s (USAID) Bureau for Humanitarian Affairs tracked all reported allegations, including fraud, across its awards and identified trends to support its oversight efforts. The Department of State and USAID also maintained processes for reviewing past performance of potential prime partners.
However, GAO also identified systematic weaknesses in agencies’ efforts to manage fraud and other risks. For example, State and USAID did not require fraud awareness training, limiting assurance that their staff could identify fraud risks. State and USAID also had weaknesses in their screening and vetting of international organizations and oversight of subawardees, which increased vulnerabilities to risks, such as fraud. Further, the U.S. African Development Foundation (USADF) lacked internal policies and processes to manage fraud and other risks. Treasury officials that supported USADF contracting told GAO that USADF procurement officials also engaged in questionable practices when making foreign assistance awards, such as steering contracts to former USADF contractual employees. USADF’s Director of Financial Management was later criminally charged by the Department of Justice.
Why GAO Did This Study
Foreign assistance is used to support U.S. foreign policy by providing resources to countries that policymakers have deemed to be strategically important, countries in conflict, and populations in need. The complex environments in which U.S. foreign assistance is often delivered have inherent risks for fraud, waste, and abuse. These risks must be recognized and better managed to fulfill programs and protect taxpayer dollars.
Fraud prevention is key as attempting to prosecute individuals and entities after they have committed fraud addresses a small fraction of fraudulent activity, requires significant time and resources, and returns only a portion, if anything, of what was lost. Tactics of those who commit fraud are constantly evolving. As such, agencies should strive to continuously improve anti-fraud efforts to more efficiently and effectively prevent, detect, and respond to fraud.
This statement focuses on (1) specific risks and examples of fraud, waste, and abuse associated with foreign assistance and (2) useful practices and weaknesses in fraud risk management in foreign assistance identified through past GAO work. This statement is based on a body of work of selected reports GAO published from July 2015 to January 2026 addressing fraud risk management in foreign assistance.
Recommendations
Since July 2016, GAO has made at least 51 recommendations to support the management of fraud and other risks for agencies delivering foreign assistance. While agencies have implemented 22 of these recommendations, addressing the remaining 29 recommendations would improve risk management and better enable agencies to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse.
Full Report
View Full Report Online
Highlights Page
(1 page)
Full Report
(25 pages)
GAO Contacts
Latesha Love-Grayer
Director
International Affairs and Trade
lovegrayerl@gao.gov
Media Inquiries
Sarah Kaczmarek
Managing Director
Office of Public Affairs
media@gao.gov
Public Inquiries
 Contact Us
Topics
International Affairs
Federal contractors
Fraud, waste, and abuse
Foreign assistance
Humanitarian assistance
Internal controls
Past performance
Risk assessment
Risk management
Compliance oversight
International organizations
Receive GAO Updates
 Stay informed as we add new reports & testimonies.
 U.S. Government Accountability Office
Column 1 
Press Center
Contact Us
Inspector General
Restricted Reports
Column 2 
Copyright & Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Accessibility
Sitemap
Column 3 
FOIA Requests
Scam Alerts
No FEAR Act Data
Health Care Advisory Committees
 v4.1.10
