
COVID-19 Relief: Consequences of Fraud and Lessons for Prevention | U.S. GAO
 Skip to main content
U.S. Government Accountability Office
Menu
Reports & Testimonies
Reports & Testimonies
Recommendations Database
Month in Review
Order Copies
Restricted Reports
View Topics
View Agencies
Bid Protests & Appropriations Law
Bid Protests & Appropriations Law
Bid Protests
Appropriations Law
Federal Vacancies Reform Act
Congressional Review Act
Other Legal
About
About
What GAO Does
U.S. Comptroller General
Careers
Contact Us
For Congress
Press Center
Careers
Blog
Breadcrumb
Home
Reports & Testimonies
COVID-19 Relief: Consequences of Fraud and Lessons For Prevention
 COVID-19 Relief:
Consequences of Fraud and Lessons for Prevention
GAO-25-107746
 Published: Apr 09, 2025. Publicly Released: Apr 09, 2025.
 Jump To: 
Jump To
Elder Abuse
Services for Older Adults
State and Local-Level Drivers and Trends
State and Local Fiscal Projections
Federal Borrowing
Managing the Debt
Summary of Funding Provisions
Summary of FYs 2022-2024 Funds
Status of FYs 2022-2024 Funds
Implementation of FYs 2022-2023 Projects
Previous Tracking the Funds Reports
Auditing the Government's Books
Unpacking the Financial Report
Highlights
Recommendations
Background
About This Work
About This Work
Topics
Trends
About the Center
Why It's High Risk
What Remains To Be Done
Key Reports
Newest COVID-Related Reports
AI at GAO
Flood Insurance
Past Pandemic-Related Reports
CARES Act Oversight Reports
All COVID-19 Reports
Report Suspected Fraud
Subjects
How to Get Notified
Past Reports
Public Health Threats
Explore the FY 2022 and 2023 Funds
Status of FY22 Projects
Lessons Learned
Agency Reports
Recent Reports
Recommendations
Supplemental Material
Full Report
Additional Data
View Decision
Downloads
Previously Identified Actions
Related Pages
Associated Agencies
Tough Choices and Opportunities Ahead
Americas Fiscal Future Key Areas
Retirement Security Key Areas
Current List
About The High Risk List
Area Ratings
Previous High Risk Products
Search Federal Vacancies
Past Federal Vacancies
Violation Letters
About the Yellow Book
Related Resources
Comment Letters
Related Publications
Contacts and Resources
Types of Changes
Listing of Key Changes
Major Issues Facing the Nation
Meeting Strategic Challenges
Additional Resources
About the Green Book
Resources
Advisory Council
Mission Teams
Operations and Staff Offices 
Organization Chart 
Why a Career at GAO?
Am I Qualified?
Company Culture
Reasonable Accommodations
Video Gallery
Paid Internships
Student Volunteers
Professional Development Program
Advancement
Executive Candidate Program
Summer Associates
Externships
Benefits
Strategy
Use Cases
Contacts
Priority Open Recommendation Letters
Key Resources
Major Issues
Downloadable Resources
How Could Federal Debt Affect You?
GAO Contacts
Drivers
Interest
Sustainability
What Needs to Be Done?
Technology Assessments
Science & Tech Spotlights
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Related Reports
Performance Audits
Blogs
Multimedia
Podcasts
Videos
Career Highlights
Tribute Videos & Statements
Testimonies
Presentations
Forums & Roundtables
Fast Facts
Hundreds of billions of dollars were likely lost to fraud during the pandemic. As of December 2024, the Department of Justice has charged more than 3,000 people, companies, and other entities with fraud-related crimes.
Defendants were typically sentenced to prison, usually 1–5 years. Most were also ordered to pay restitution in varying amounts, with the highest over $71 million.
It’s crucial for agencies to learn from these events to help them fight fraud during normal operations and future emergencies.
This 
Q&A
 offers ways for agencies to enhance their antifraud strategies. We also discuss examples of pandemic-relief fraud and consequences.
Skip to Highlights
Highlights
What GAO Found
The full extent of fraud within the pandemic-relief programs will never be known with certainty. The scope of the pandemic-relief response; the inherently deceptive nature of fraudulent activities; and the resources needed for detection, investigation, and prosecution of fraud make it difficult to measure. However, estimates indicate hundreds of billions of dollars in potentially fraudulent payments were disbursed.
As of December 31, 2024, the Department of Justice (DOJ) has publicly announced criminal fraud-related charges involving pandemic-relief programs against at least 3,096 defendants—which can be individuals or entities. 
Number of Defendants Charged with Criminal Fraud-Related Offenses Involving Pandemic-Relief Programs and Case Status, as of December 31, 2024
a
Defendants found guilty of pandemic-related criminal fraud charges have been typically sentenced to prison time and ordered to pay restitution. Their sentencing varied based on the circumstances of the offense, as well as other factors.
The number of defendants facing criminal fraud-related charges involving pandemic-relief programs continues to increase, as it takes time for new cases to be identified and developed, and hundreds of investigations are still underway. Additionally, extensions to statutes of limitations may contribute to an increase in cases.
In reviewing DOJ case documentation, GAO identified different types of fraud schemes and fraudsters who defrauded at least 19 different pandemic-relief programs. In addition to more traditional and organized criminal groups, entities in a wide variety of sectors, and individuals from all walks of life, defrauded these programs.
Although criminal prosecutions serve as a key tool in the mission to address pandemic-relief program fraud and recover stolen funds, civil actions offer the government alternative ways to uncover more fraud schemes and recover assets. According to DOJ, from March 2020 to December 31, 2024, it has secured more than 650 civil settlements and judgments, totaling more than $500 million to resolve allegations of fraud or overpayments in connection with the pandemic-relief programs.
Interagency task forces, such as the COVID-19 Fraud Enforcement Task Force, and the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee (PRAC) were established to combat pandemic-relief program fraud. According to the task force’s 2024 report, civil administrative and civil and criminal judicial cases resulted in the forfeiture of over $1 billion in fraudulent proceeds. In December 2024, the PRAC reported that the PRAC Fraud Task Force efforts have led to criminal charges against 111 subjects and assisted the federal government in recovering over $16 million.
Although some individuals might never be swayed from attempting to defraud government programs, agencies can implement deterrence actions—such as emphasizing the consequences of committing fraud and highlighting controls in place—to help prevent future fraudsters. Also, by examining fraudsters and fraud schemes that emerged during the pandemic, agencies can identify fraud mitigation controls that can be implemented in emergency environments and normal operations.
GAO’s 
Fraud Risk Framework
 identifies leading practices for agencies to better plan for and take a more strategic approach toward managing fraud risks in normal operations but also when responding to emergency situations. In addition, GAO has recommended numerous actions that federal agencies should take to help ensure they are effectively managing fraud risks and preventing as much fraud as possible up front. For example, GAO recommended that agencies use data analytics to better manage fraud risk.
Further, GAO has released various 
reports
 and 
insights
 that may help agencies as they prepare and plan to implement controls and mitigate fraud risks for future emergencies. Considering what was likely lost to fraud during the pandemic, it is crucial for agencies to have effective fraud prevention and deterrence strategies.
Why GAO Did This Study
Pandemic-relief programs were critical for assuring public health and economic stability. However, they also created unprecedented opportunities for fraud due to the dollars involved and other risk factors.
Considering what was likely lost to fraud during the pandemic, assessing what lessons and insights can be taken to better prepare for both normal operations and future emergencies is critical for agencies. Beyond financial impacts, fraud erodes public trust in government and hinders agencies’ efforts to execute their missions and program objectives effectively and efficiently. Therefore, it is important to take steps to prevent fraud from occurring in the first place.
While the disbursement of pandemic-relief funds is largely over, the work of investigating, prosecuting, and recovering fraudulently disbursed funds is still ongoing. DOJ and its law enforcement partners continue to prioritize the investigation and prosecution of defendants that committed these offenses.
GAO performed this work under the CARES Act that includes a provision for GAO to report on its ongoing monitoring and oversight efforts related to the COVID-19 pandemic. This report provides information on the status of pandemic-relief program cases involving fraud-related charges brought by DOJ and how agencies can enhance fraud prevention.
For more information, contact Rebecca Shea at 
shear@gao.gov
.
Full Report
Full Report
(21 pages)
Accessible PDF
(21 pages)
GAO Contacts
Rebecca Shea
Director
Forensic Audits and Investigative Service
shear@gao.gov
Media Inquiries
Sarah Kaczmarek
Managing Director
Office of Public Affairs
media@gao.gov
Public Inquiries
 Contact Us
Topics
Government Operations
Criminal investigations
Defendants
Federal assistance programs
Improper payments
pandemics
Public health emergencies
Restitution
Statutory limitation
Whistleblowers
Law courts
Multimedia
Blog Post
Fraud and Its Consequences—Who Steals from Federal Programs and What’s the Cost?
Thursday, July 17, 2025
 Hundreds of billions of dollars are lost to fraud each year. Fraud can happen at any time. But...
Blog Post
Nine Ways Congress Can Combat Fraud in the Federal Government
Tuesday, September 1, 2026
 Each year the federal government loses an estimated $233 billion to $521 billion to fraud. There is...
Receive GAO Updates
 Stay informed as we add new reports & testimonies.
 U.S. Government Accountability Office
Footer menu
Column 1 
Press Center
Contact Us
Inspector General
Restricted Reports
Column 2 
Copyright & Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Accessibility
Sitemap
Column 3 
FOIA Requests
Scam Alerts
No FEAR Act Data
Health Care Advisory Committees
 v4.2.27
