
Improper Payments: Information on Agencies' Fiscal Year 2024 Estimates | U.S. GAO
 Skip to main content
U.S. Government Accountability Office
Menu
Reports & Testimonies
Reports & Testimonies
Recommendations Database
Month in Review
Order Copies
Restricted Reports
View Topics
View Agencies
Bid Protests & Appropriations Law
Bid Protests & Appropriations Law
Bid Protests
Appropriations Law
Federal Vacancies Reform Act
Congressional Review Act
Other Legal
About
About
What GAO Does
U.S. Comptroller General
Careers
Contact Us
For Congress
Press Center
Careers
Blog
Breadcrumb
Home
Reports & Testimonies
Improper Payments: Information On Agencies' Fiscal Year 2024 Estimates
 Improper Payments:
Information on Agencies' Fiscal Year 2024 Estimates
GAO-25-107753
 Published: Mar 11, 2025. Publicly Released: Mar 11, 2025.
 Jump To: 
Jump To
Elder Abuse
Services for Older Adults
State and Local-Level Drivers and Trends
State and Local Fiscal Projections
Federal Borrowing
Managing the Debt
Summary of Funding Provisions
Summary of FYs 2022-2024 Funds
Status of FYs 2022-2024 Funds
Implementation of FYs 2022-2023 Projects
Previous Tracking the Funds Reports
Auditing the Government's Books
Unpacking the Financial Report
Highlights
Recommendations
Background
About This Work
About This Work
Topics
Trends
About the Center
Why It's High Risk
What Remains To Be Done
Key Reports
Newest COVID-Related Reports
AI at GAO
Flood Insurance
Past Pandemic-Related Reports
CARES Act Oversight Reports
All COVID-19 Reports
Report Suspected Fraud
Subjects
How to Get Notified
Past Reports
Public Health Threats
Explore the FY 2022 and 2023 Funds
Status of FY22 Projects
Lessons Learned
Agency Reports
Recent Reports
Recommendations
Supplemental Material
Full Report
Additional Data
View Decision
Downloads
Previously Identified Actions
Related Pages
Associated Agencies
Tough Choices and Opportunities Ahead
Americas Fiscal Future Key Areas
Retirement Security Key Areas
Current List
About The High Risk List
Area Ratings
Previous High Risk Products
Search Federal Vacancies
Past Federal Vacancies
Violation Letters
About the Yellow Book
Related Resources
Comment Letters
Related Publications
Contacts and Resources
Types of Changes
Listing of Key Changes
Major Issues Facing the Nation
Meeting Strategic Challenges
Additional Resources
About the Green Book
Resources
Advisory Council
Mission Teams
Operations and Staff Offices 
Organization Chart 
Why a Career at GAO?
Am I Qualified?
Company Culture
Reasonable Accommodations
Video Gallery
Paid Internships
Student Volunteers
Professional Development Program
Advancement
Executive Candidate Program
Summer Associates
Externships
Benefits
Strategy
Use Cases
Contacts
Priority Open Recommendation Letters
Key Resources
Major Issues
Downloadable Resources
How Could Federal Debt Affect You?
GAO Contacts
Drivers
Interest
Sustainability
What Needs to Be Done?
Technology Assessments
Science & Tech Spotlights
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Related Reports
Performance Audits
Blogs
Multimedia
Podcasts
Videos
Career Highlights
Tribute Videos & Statements
Testimonies
Presentations
Forums & Roundtables
Fast Facts
Improper payments—those that shouldn't have been made or were made in the incorrect amount—have been a government-wide issue for more than 20 years. In FY 2024, 16 federal agencies reported a total estimate of about $162 billion in improper payments across 68 programs. Of these, approximately 84% were a result of overpayments.
This 
Q&A
 shows that the agencies' estimates represent a small subset of federal programs. The estimates do not include certain programs that are susceptible to significant improper payments.
Federal improper payments since FY 2003 are estimated at about $2.8 trillion.
Skip to Highlights
Highlights
What GAO Found
For fiscal year 2024, 16 agencies reported a total estimated $162 billion in improper payments across 68 programs. Agencies reported that about $135 billion (approximately 84 percent) of this total was the result of overpayments. About $121 billion (approximately 75 percent) was concentrated in five program areas. Eighteen federal programs reported improper payment rate estimates of at least 10 percent, including six programs whose rates ranged from over 25 percent to about 45 percent.
However, the improper payment estimates do not represent the full extent of government-wide improper payments. For instance, the $162 billion total represents a small subset of all federal programs and does not include certain programs that agencies have determined are susceptible to significant improper payments. These include the Department of Health and Human Services’ Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Office of Public and Indian Housing’s Tenant-Based Rental Assistance, and the Small Business Administration’s Shuttered Venue Operators Grant program.
Programs Reporting the Largest Percentage of Government-Wide Improper Payments Estimates for Fiscal Year 2024
Agencies reported about $74 billion less in improper payment estimates in fiscal year 2024 than they did in the prior fiscal year. Agencies that reported substantial decreases attributed the declines to factors such as terminating or winding down certain programs. These include programs specific to the COVID-19 pandemic and programs for which agencies had temporary review flexibilities during the public health emergency (e.g., Medicaid).
The Payment Integrity Information Act of 2019 (PIIA) and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) established criteria and guidance that executive branch agencies must comply with in assessing risk and estimating and reporting improper payments. PIIA also requires the inspector general (IG) at each executive branch agency to issue an annual report on the agency’s compliance with applicable PIIA criteria. In fiscal year 2023, 13 of the 24 Chief Financial Officers Act agencies fully complied with PIIA criteria and related OMB requirements, according to their IG. This was a decrease from fiscal year 2022, when IGs reported 14 agencies were fully compliant.
Eleven agencies were noncompliant with at least one criterion in fiscal year 2023, as reported by their IGs. The IGs identified a variety of causes for agencies’ noncompliance with these criteria, such as inadequate risk assessments and unreliable estimates (see table).
Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 Agencies Noncompliant with Payment Integrity Information Act of 2019 and Office of Management and Budget Criteria for Fiscal Year 2023, as Reported by Their Inspectors General
Agency
Criteria that agency did not comply with
Department of Agriculture
Publish corrective action plans
Publish reduction target
Report improper payments and unknown payment estimates of less than 10%
Department of Defense
Publish improper payment estimates
Department of Health and Human Services
Publish improper payment estimates
Demonstrate improvements to payment integrity
Develop a plan to meet the reduction target
Report improper payments and unknown payment estimates of less than 10%
Department of Homeland Security
Publish improper payment estimates
Department of Housing and Urban Development
Publish improper payment estimates
Department of Labor
Publish payment integrity information within the agency financial report (AFR)
Publish reduction target
Develop a plan to meet the reduction target
Report improper payments and unknown payment estimates of less than 10%
Department of the Treasury
Adequately conclude improper payment likelihood from risk assessment
Report improper payments and unknown payment estimates of less than 10%
Department of Veterans Affairs
Report improper payments and unknown payment estimates of less than 10%
Office of Personnel Management
Publish improper payment estimates
Publish corrective action plans
Demonstrate improvements to payment integrity
Report improper payments and unknown payment estimates of less than 10%
Small Business Administration
Publish payment integrity information within the AFR
Post AFR on agency website
Publish improper payment estimates
Publish corrective action plans
Publish reduction target
Demonstrate improvements to payment integrity
Develop a plan to meet the reduction target
Report improper payments and unknown payment estimates of less than 10%
Social Security Administration
Demonstrate improvements to payment integrity
Source: GAO analysis of inspectors general compliance reports. | GAO-25-107753
Why GAO Did This Study
Improper payments—those that should not have been made or were made in the incorrect amount—have consistently been a government-wide issue. Since fiscal year 2003, cumulative improper payment estimates by executive branch agencies have totaled about $2.8 trillion, and the actual amount of improper payments may be significantly higher. Reducing improper payments is critical to safeguarding federal funds.
GAO has reported on improper payments in its audit reports on the U.S. government’s consolidated financial statements since fiscal year 1997, finding that these payments represent a material deficiency or weakness in internal controls. Specifically, GAO has noted that the federal government is unable to determine the full extent of its improper payments or to reasonably assure that agencies take appropriate actions to reduce them.
House Report 117-389, which accompanied the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 2023, includes a provision for GAO to provide quarterly reports on improper payments. This is GAO’s ninth such report, and it provides an overview of federal agencies’ reported improper payment estimates for fiscal year 2024. This report also discusses agencies’ compliance with requirements for reporting and managing improper payments.
Recommendations
GAO has made numerous recommendations to Congress and agencies to help reduce improper payments government-wide. In March 2022, GAO recommended 10 matters for congressional consideration to enhance transparency and accountability of federal spending. These matters included designating all new federal programs making more than $100 million in payments in any one fiscal year as susceptible to improper payments and establishing a permanent data analytics center of excellence to aid the oversight community in identifying improper payments and fraud. In April 2022, GAO recommended that Congress consider providing the Department of Health and Human Services the authority to require states to report the data the agency needs to estimate and report on improper payments for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. As of January 2025, these matters remain open.
Full Report
Full Report
(16 pages)
Accessible PDF
(18 pages)
GAO Contacts
Hannah Padilla
Director
Financial Management and Assurance
FMAWebTeam@gao.gov
Media Inquiries
Sarah Kaczmarek
Managing Director
Office of Public Affairs
media@gao.gov
Public Inquiries
 Contact Us
Topics
Auditing and Financial Management
Earned income tax credit
Federal funds
Financial statements
Improper payments
Inspectors general
Risk assessment
Corrective action
Compliance oversight
Small business
Federal assistance programs
Multimedia
Blog Post
Federal Government Made an Estimated $162 billion in Improper Payments Last Fiscal Year
Tuesday, March 11, 2025
 Note: This blog post was updated to include a video showing GAO's Kristen Kociolek testifying before...
Blog Post
How is Social Security Death Data Helping to Prevent Federal Payment Errors?
Thursday, February 19, 2026
 The federal government makes all kinds of payments each day, everything from Social Security...
Receive GAO Updates
 Stay informed as we add new reports & testimonies.
 U.S. Government Accountability Office
Footer menu
Column 1 
Press Center
Contact Us
Inspector General
Restricted Reports
Column 2 
Copyright & Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Accessibility
Sitemap
Column 3 
FOIA Requests
Scam Alerts
No FEAR Act Data
Health Care Advisory Committees
 v4.2.26
