OIG-26-04                                April 22, 2026

FINAL REPORT
FEMA Cannot Ensure Humanitarian Funding for Aliens
Complied with Laws and Regulations
                      OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                          U.S. Department of Homeland Security
                            Washington, DC 20528 | www.oig.dhs.gov


                                          April 22, 2026

MEMORANDUM FOR:              Karen S. Evans
                             Senior Official Performing the Duties of the Administrator
                             Federal Emergency Management Agency

FROM:                        Joseph V. Cuffari, Ph.D.
                             Inspector General

SUBJECT:                     FEMA Cannot Ensure Humanitarian Funding for Aliens Complied
                             with Laws and Regulations

Attached for your action is our final report, FEMA Cannot Ensure Humanitarian Funding for
Aliens Complied with Laws and Regulations. We incorporated the formal comments provided by
your office.

The report contains five recommendations aimed at improving FEMA’s oversight controls for
humanitarian funding during the grant closeout process for the Emergency Food and Shelter
Program-Humanitarian Relief and Shelter and Services Program. Your office concurred with all
five recommendations. Based on information provided in your response to the draft report, we
consider the recommendations open and resolved. Once your office has fully implemented the
recommendations, please submit a formal closeout letter to us within 30 days so that we may
close the recommendations. The memorandum should be accompanied by evidence of
completion of agreed-upon corrective actions and of the disposition of any monetary amounts.

Please send your response or closure request to OIGAuditsFollowup@oig.dhs.gov.

Consistent with our responsibility under the Inspector General Act, we will provide copies of our
report to congressional committees with oversight and appropriation responsibility over the
Department of Homeland Security. We will post the report on our website for public
dissemination.

Please contact me with any questions, or your staff may contact Craig Adelman, Deputy
Inspector General, Office of Audits, at (202) 981-6000.

Attachment




                             OIG Project No. 24-016-AUD-FEMA, CBP
                                      DHS OIG HIGHLIGHTS
                          FEMA Cannot Ensure Humanitarian Funding for Aliens
                                 Complied with Laws and Regulations


 April 22, 2026                                 What We Found
                                                The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) cannot ensure
 Why We Did This                                non-Federal entities used Emergency Food and Shelter Program-
                                                Humanitarian Relief (EFSP-H) and Shelter and Services Program
 Audit                                          (SSP) funding in fiscal years 2023 and 2024 in compliance with
                                                applicable laws and regulations. Without improved oversight, FEMA
 FEMA awarded nearly $1.4 billion               faces an increased risk of funding unallowable costs and making
 in grant funding through EFSP-H                duplicate payments when administering grants.
 and SSP in FYs 2023 and 2024.
 The grant funds supplemented                   Specifically, we found FEMA:
 humanitarian relief efforts of state
 and local governments and                      • did not review EFSP-H expenditures to ensure funds were used
 nonprofit organizations (non-                    for allowable costs and eligible aliens, resulting in $425 million in
 Federal entities) assisting aliens               questioned costs;
 encountered by the Department
 of Homeland Security. We                       • did not consistently review SSP payment requests to verify that
 conducted this audit to determine                costs were allowable, resulting in $16.5 million in questioned
 the extent to which FEMA ensured                 costs; and
 non-Federal entities used EFSP-H
 and SSP funding in FYs 2023 and                • did not perform verification to prevent duplication of funding
 2024 in compliance with                          between EFSP-H and SSP grants.
 applicable laws and regulations.
                                                These deficiencies occurred because FEMA did not establish and
 What We                                        implement necessary internal controls to review EFSP-H and SSP
                                                expenditures. Although DHS terminated the SSP grant awards after
 Recommend                                      we began fieldwork, we completed this audit as our findings may
                                                help FEMA avoid fraud, waste, or abuse during program closeout.
 We made five recommendations
 to improve FEMA’s oversight                    Data Access: FEMA denied us direct, read-only access to the FEMA
 controls for humanitarian                      Grants Outcomes back-end database. After multiple delays, FEMA
 funding during the EFSP-H and                  instead provided raw data for SSP grants and then direct, read-only
 SSP grant closeout process.                    access to SSP award records through the system’s front-end interface.

 For Further Information:
 Contact OIG Public Affairs at (202) 981-6000   FEMA Response
 or DHS-OIG.OfficePublicAffairs@oig.dhs.gov.
                                                FEMA concurred with all five recommendations. Appendix B
                                                contains FEMA’s management response in its entirety.


www.oig.dhs.gov                                                                                                OIG-26-04
                                   OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                                     U.S. Department of Homeland Security


                                                Background
From fiscal years 2019 to 2024, Congress authorized the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) to provide grant funding to supplement the humanitarian relief efforts of state
and local governments and nonprofit organizations (non-Federal entities)1 assisting aliens2
encountered and released by the Department of Homeland Security. The grant funds were
awarded to provide food, shelter, basic medical care, transportation, and other supportive
services, and distributed through FEMA’s Emergency Food and Shelter Program-Humanitarian
Relief (EFSP-H) and Shelter and Services Program (SSP).3

Emergency Food and Shelter Program-Humanitarian Relief
In FYs 2019, 2021, and 2022, Congress appropriated a total of $290 million to FEMA for EFSP-H.
FEMA awarded the funds through grants to the National Board,4 which then disbursed the
funds as subawards to non-Federal entities. The program involved multiple organizations and
responsible officials, each with different roles:

    •   The National Board served as the governing body to administer EFSP-H. It established
        program policies, procedures, and guidelines; made award decisions; and oversaw
        the use of funds. The Board was composed of six non-Federal organizations and FEMA.

    •   The National Board’s designated fiscal agent and secretariat carried out the day-to-day
        administrative duties and functions on behalf of the Board. This included receiving,
        distributing, and reconciling FEMA funds, and collecting supporting documentation.



1
  Hereafter, we refer to state and local governments and nonprofit organizations as non-Federal entities.
2
  An alien is any person who is not a U.S. citizen or a U.S. national. 8 United States Code (U.S.C.) § 1101(a)(3).
3
  FEMA’s Emergency Food and Shelter Program (EFSP) was established in March 1983 through the passage of the
Temporary Emergency Food Assistance Act of 1983 (Title I of P.L. 98−8) to supplement the work of local social
service organizations (nonprofit, faith-based, and governmental) by providing food, shelter, and support
services to individuals and families experiencing economic crisis, and to help prevent homelessness. EFSP was
later authorized under the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act of 1987 (Title III of P.L. 100−77), which
was renamed the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act in 2000. EFSP is codified at 42 U.S.C. §§ 11331 et.
seq. In FY 2019, Congress expanded the program’s mission by authorizing FEMA to provide humanitarian relief
through EFSP-H grants to non-Federal entities supporting aliens encountered by DHS along the Southern
border. Four years later, Congress established SSP to replace EFSP-H. For additional information, see FEMA
Assistance for Migrants Through the Emergency Food and Shelter Program-Humanitarian (EFSP-H) and Shelter
and Services Program (SSP), Congressional Research Service R47681, August 31, 2023.
4
  The McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (Title III of P.L. 100−77) directed FEMA to constitute a National
Board for the purpose of administering EFSP. According to this Act, the National Board shall establish written
guidelines for carrying out the program, including methods for identifying individual localities with the highest
need; methods for determining the amount and distribution of funds to such localities; eligible program costs;
and responsibilities and reporting requirements of the National Board, its recipients, and service providers.


www.oig.dhs.gov                                         1                                               OIG-26-04
                                  OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                                     U.S. Department of Homeland Security


    •   FEMA’s Individual Assistance Division Director served as the National Board Chair. The
        Chair acted as Federal liaison to the Board and provided the Board with administrative
        support. Separately, in its role as grantor of EFSP-H funds, FEMA was responsible for
        monitoring the grants and providing technical assistance to the grantee (the Board)
        and did so through FEMA’s Individual Assistance Division.

    •   The local board, which served as the governing body for its respective county or city,
        was responsible for reviewing funding applications, determining applicant eligibility,
        submitting applications to the National Board, and monitoring the use of funds.

    •   The fiscal agent, a local recipient organization designated by the local board, received
        and disbursed EFSP-H funds to vendors, maintained financial documentation, and
        monitored the use of funds.

Shelter and Services Program
Due to increased migration along the Southern border, in FY 2023 Congress authorized FEMA
and U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) to establish a new grant program, SSP, to
replace EFSP-H. DHS Appropriations Acts5 directed CBP to transfer $1.45 billion to FEMA for
SSP — $800 million in FY 2023 and $650 million in FY 2024. Of the $800 million transferred in
FY 2023, FEMA was authorized to use up to $785 million to continue services under EFSP-H
while establishing SSP to ensure uninterrupted support.

FEMA’s Grant Programs Directorate and CBP’s Operations Support Office established and
jointly administered SSP.

    •   As the Federal awarding agency, FEMA was responsible for developing SSP program
        requirements, issuing notices of funding opportunity (NOFO),6 reviewing applications,
        making grant awards, monitoring the use of funds, and conducting award closeout
        procedures to ensure compliance with laws and regulations.

    •   CBP provided FEMA with relevant data and models regarding aliens encountered at
        U.S. borders, recommended funding priorities, and participated in the application
        review process.




5
 Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2023 (Title II, Division F of Pub. L. No. 117−328) and
Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2024 (Title II, Division C of Pub. L. No. 118−47) directed
CBP to transfer the funds from CBP’s Operations and Support account to FEMA’s Federal Assistance account.
6
  A NOFO is a formal announcement of the availability of funding through a financial assistance program from a
Federal awarding agency. It provides information on the award, including who is eligible to apply, evaluation
criteria for selecting the awardee, required components of an application, and how to submit the application.


www.oig.dhs.gov                                         2                                              OIG-26-04
                                     OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                                        U.S. Department of Homeland Security


As of September 30, 2024, FEMA awarded nearly $1.4 billion in grant funding during FYs 2023
and 2024. Of this amount, FEMA awarded $425 million to the National Board for EFSP-H in
FY 2023, and about $1 billion to 84 non-Federal entities for SSP in FYs 2023 and 2024. Table 1
provides a summary of FEMA’s grant awards.

                           Table 1. FEMA Grant Awards through EFSP-H
                           and SSP in FYs 2023 and 2024
                            Fiscal Year             Award Type              Award Amount

                                2023                   EFSP-H                $425.0 Million
                                2023                    SSP                  $363.8 Million
                                2024                    SSP                  $640.9 Million
                                Total         EFSP-H and SSP                  $1.4 Billion

                           Source: DHS Office of Inspector General analysis of FEMA records

On January 28, 2025, DHS directed FEMA to place a hold on the disbursement of all grant
funds, including SSP funding, to non-Federal entities whose activities were related to
immigration.7 The funding hold did not apply to EFSP-H, as the National Board had already
disbursed all FY 2023 program funding, and the related subaward spending period ended on
December 31, 2024. On March 31, 2025, DHS terminated all SSP grant awards, stating the
program was not aligned with the Department’s priorities related to immigration enforcement
and border security. Subsequently, on April 1, 2025, FEMA issued letters to non-Federal
entities terminating all FY 2023 and 2024 SSP grant awards.

The National Board has initiated grant closeout procedures8 for EFSP-H, and FEMA has
initiated grant closeout procedures for SSP. The closeout process includes reviewing final
financial reports from non-Federal entities, determining allowable costs,9 recovering




7
 Memorandum from DHS Secretary for Component and Office Heads, Direction on Grants to Non-governmental
Organizations, January 28, 2025. According to this memorandum, the reasons for this freeze included (1) concerns
that these grants may be funding illegal activities, such as encouraging or inducing illegal immigration, 8 U.S.C.
§ 1324(a)(1)(A)(iv), or illegal harboring of illegal aliens, 8 U.S.C. § 1324(a)(1)(A)(ii)-(iii); (2) concerns that there may
be racially discriminatory language in certain grants; and (3) concerns that these grants may not be an efficient
use of Government resources.
8
  2 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) §§ 200.344−345.
9
  To be allowable, costs must be reasonable in nature and amount, allocable to the FEMA award, included in the
approved budget, and adequately documented. 2 C.F.R. § 200.403.


www.oig.dhs.gov                                              3                                                  OIG-26-04
                                 OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                                    U.S. Department of Homeland Security


unallowable costs, and de-obligating unused funds. According to Department officials, DHS
repurposed SSP funding for FY 202510 and eliminated SSP funding in FY 2026.11

Although DHS terminated the SSP grant awards after we began fieldwork, we continued the
audit as our findings can help FEMA avoid potential fraud, waste, or abuse during program
closeout. In an earlier report,12 we identified weaknesses in FEMA’s oversight of funding
awarded to the National Board, which left EFSP-H funding susceptible to fraud, waste, and
abuse. Specifically, we found non-Federal entities did not always provide documentation for
claimed reimbursements and did not maintain information to verify whether the aliens served
were eligible to receive services under EFSP-H. This occurred because FEMA relied on local
boards and fiscal agents to enforce the Board’s guidance. We made two recommendations to
improve FEMA’s oversight and enforcement for future appropriations.13 FEMA concurred with
both recommendations. The second recommendation was closed, and the first
recommendation remains open.

We conducted this audit to determine the extent to which FEMA ensured non-Federal entities
used EFSP-H and SSP funding in FYs 2023 and 2024 in compliance with applicable laws and
regulations.

                                           Results of Audit

Key Finding 1. FEMA Did Not Review Expenditures for FY 2023 EFSP-H Awards
FEMA’s Individual Assistance Division and the National Board did not review ongoing
expenditures associated with FY 2023 EFSP-H awards to ensure humanitarian funds were used
for allowable costs and eligible aliens, resulting in $425 million in questioned costs. Although
FEMA and the Board issued new guidance to partially address recommendation 1 and close
recommendation 2 from our 2023 report, we found they did not implement the guidance to
provide appropriate oversight of EFSP-H expenditures.



10
   For FY 2025, Congress enacted three continuing resolutions that funded SSP at the FY 2024 level of $650
million: the Continuing Appropriations and Extensions Act, 2025 (Pub. L. No. 118−83); the American Relief Act,
2025 (Pub. L. No. 118−158); and the Full-Year Continuing Appropriations and Extensions Act, 2025 (Pub. L. No.
119−4).
11
   Department of Homeland Security Fiscal Year 2026 Congressional Justification, June 12, 2025.
12
   FEMA Should Increase Oversight to Prevent Misuse of Humanitarian Relief Funds, OIG-23-20, March 28, 2023.
13
   Recommendation 1 was for FEMA to ensure the National Board resolves the $7.4 million in questioned costs
and incorporates controls in EFSP-H guidance to minimize future reimbursements of unsupported costs.
Recommendation 2 was for FEMA to ensure the National Board implements oversight measures to enforce EFSP-H
guidance for future supplemental appropriations including by developing a risk-based methodology to review a
sample of ongoing funding execution for future supplemental appropriations to ensure funds approved are
reviewed and reconciled for completeness and accuracy and supported with appropriate documentation.


www.oig.dhs.gov                                       4                                            OIG-26-04
                                 OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                                    U.S. Department of Homeland Security


FEMA and the National Board Did Not Collect Quarterly Reports to Review Spending

FEMA and the National Board did not collect quarterly spending reports to review ongoing
expenditures related to EFSP-H funding, as required. In response to our 2023 report, FEMA
and the Board issued new EFSP-H guidance14 requiring non-Federal entities to submit
quarterly reports with spending information about services provided to aliens encountered by
DHS. Despite issuing a policy to provide more oversight on how funds were spent, FEMA and
the Board did not enforce the new requirement and did not collect any quarterly reports.

This occurred because FEMA did not ensure the National Board established and implemented
a system to collect the quarterly reports. FEMA and the Board continued to rely on local
boards and fiscal agents to review ongoing expenditures without pursuing other methods.
According to FEMA officials, the Board disbursed advanced funding directly to the non-Federal
entities’ bank accounts. However, the Board did not have access to these accounts, so it
could not monitor or report on how the funds were used. Officials explained that information
on final expenditures and remaining balances will not be available to FEMA until the Board
completes its review, reconciliation, and grant closeout process for EFSP-H subawards,
scheduled for completion by September 30, 2026.

As a result, FEMA and the National Board cannot verify that $425 million in EFSP-H funding
was used for allowable costs.

FEMA and the National Board Did Not Ensure EFSP-H Funds Were Used for Eligible Aliens

FEMA and the National Board did not ensure non-Federal entities provided EFSP-H services
only to eligible aliens — those encountered and released by DHS. In response to our 2023
report, FEMA and the Board issued new EFSP-H guidance15 requiring non-Federal entities to
maintain documentation with alien registration numbers (A-Number)16 and each alien’s first
and last name for 3 years. However, the guidance did not require non-Federal entities to
submit the A-Number data to the Board or CBP for validation.17 We found that neither FEMA
nor the Board collected A-Number and name data from non-Federal entities. Further, FEMA


14
   National Board, Humanitarian Relief Funding Guidance Fiscal Year 2023 (Continuing Resolution $75 Million)
Application and Funding Guidance, December 2022.
15
   National Board, Humanitarian Relief Funding Guidance Fiscal Year 2023 (Department of Homeland Security
Appropriations Act, 2023 - $350 Million) Application and Funding Guidance, March 2023.
16
   The A-Number is a unique number assigned to aliens encountered by DHS to track their interactions with DHS.
Only aliens with an A-Number are eligible to receive services under EFSP-H.
17
   DHS’ Enforcement Integrated Database stores and maintains information related to persons encountered
during immigration and criminal law enforcement investigations and operations conducted by U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, and CBP. CBP can perform validation
checks to ensure an alien’s A-Number, first name, and last name match information in the database. This
validation process aims to avoid the reimbursement of costs for services provided to ineligible aliens.


www.oig.dhs.gov                                       5                                             OIG-26-04
                                OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                                   U.S. Department of Homeland Security


officials stated the Board did not plan to collect and validate such information as part of its
review, reconciliation, and grant closeout process for EFSP-H subawards.

FEMA cited two factors contributing to the lack of A-Number collection:

     •   Collecting A-Numbers at the National Board level would have required significant
         privacy controls to handle the sensitive personally identifiable information, thus
         increasing the complexity and administrative cost of the program. Therefore, the
         Board did not feel it was justified or feasible to collect A-Numbers.

     •   The statutory structure for EFSP-H resulted in limited Federal control, as FEMA did not
         have unilateral authority over the National Board. DHS and FEMA supported the
         creation of SSP as a better structure to monitor the use of funds.

Without the collection and validation of A-Numbers and alien’s first and last names, FEMA
cannot ensure that non-Federal entities used humanitarian funding for eligible aliens.

Key Finding 2. FEMA Did Not Consistently Review SSP Payment Requests
FEMA’s Grant Programs Directorate did not consistently review SSP payment requests to verify
whether costs associated with humanitarian funds for aliens were allowable. 2 C.F.R. Part 200
and FEMA Manual 205-0-1, Grants Management Policy, Chapter 5, require FEMA to ensure non-
Federal entities spend funds for allowable costs in compliance with applicable laws,
regulations, and program requirements. According to the FY 2023 SSP NOFO and related FEMA
training material,18 non-Federal entities must submit payment requests for reimbursement and
upload supporting documentation in FEMA Grants Outcomes (FEMA GO),19 including:

     •   a spreadsheet with A-Number data or evidence of DHS processing, first and last names,
         and corresponding DHS release dates and services dates (start and end dates); and

     •   proof of payment, such as canceled checks, credit card statements, personnel
         timesheets, and payroll reports for labor costs, as well as proof of purchase, including
         itemized receipts and invoices with sufficient detail.

We reviewed a judgmental sample of seven approved payments to five non-Federal entities,
totaling $48.2 million. This represented nearly 87 percent of the $55.6 million in payments


 FEMA presentation, Requesting a Payment Shelter and Services Program Fiscal Year 2023 Recipients and
18

Shelter and Services Program Payment Request Slick Sheet, March 2024.
19
  FEMA GO is the grants management system of record for SSP. FEMA Manual 205-0-1 requires staff to maintain
an official award file in FEMA GO containing records associated with administrative, financial, and
programmatic activities throughout the grants management lifecycle.


www.oig.dhs.gov                                      6                                            OIG-26-04
                                  OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                                    U.S. Department of Homeland Security


FEMA made against the total $1 billion in SSP awards obligated in FYs 2023 and 2024.20 Based
on our review, we questioned $16.5 million (or 34 percent of the $48.2 million) associated
with six of the seven payments in the sample. Specifically, we found:

     •   FEMA did not ensure required documents, including A-Number data, proof of payment,
         or proof of purchase, were uploaded to FEMA GO for three payments, resulting in
         $7.8 million in questioned costs.

     •   Although FEMA requested that CBP perform A-Number validation checks in the DHS
         Enforcement Integrated Database for aliens assisted through SSP, FEMA did not use
         the results of these checks to accurately calculate allowable costs for two payments,
         resulting in $5.6 million in questioned costs. FEMA made calculation errors and did
         not ensure that invoice service dates aligned with the dates in the A-Number data.

     •   FEMA did not ensure that invoices submitted for three payments included sufficient
         detail to support the claimed SSP costs, resulting in $3.1 million in questioned costs.
         Invoices for laundry services and medical care listed only flat amounts without
         itemized breakdowns or applicable billing rates.

This occurred because FEMA’s Grant Programs Directorate launched SSP without developing
and implementing formal program guidance for reviewing SSP payment requests. Instead,
FEMA officials relied on unsigned, ad-hoc policies and procedures. Without improved
oversight during the grant closeout process, FEMA faces an increased risk of funding
unallowable costs.

Key Finding 3. FEMA Did Not Perform Verification to Prevent Duplication of
Funding
FEMA and the National Board relied solely on self-certifications21 from non-Federal entities
and did not perform verification to ensure costs were not claimed under both the EFSP-H and
SSP programs. Federal regulations and FEMA guidance22 prohibit duplication of funding.

The FY 2023 and 2024 EFSP-H and SSP grants were at risk of duplication of funding because
they provided similar services and because the spending periods for EFSP-H subawards

20
   As of September 30, 2024, FEMA paid about $55.6 million to non-Federal entities on the SSP grants awarded in
FYs 2023 and 2024.
21
   We previously reported FEMA’s use of self-certification is not a reliable control to prevent duplication of
funding and improper payments (FEMA Has Made More than $3 Billion in Improper and Potentially Fraudulent
Payments for Home Repair Assistance since 2003, OIG-20-23, April 6, 2020, and FEMA Did Not Implement
Controls to Prevent More than $3.7 Billion in Improper Payments from the Lost Wages Assistance Program, OIG-
22-69, September 16, 2022).
22
   2 C.F.R. § 200.405(c) and FEMA Manual 205-0-1, § 4.3.3.2.


www.oig.dhs.gov                                        7                                             OIG-26-04
                            OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                               U.S. Department of Homeland Security


overlapped with the periods of performance for SSP grant awards by up to 22 months due to
multiple EFSP-H extensions (see Figure 1). Although non-Federal entities were required to
provide self-certifications, FEMA was unable to provide detailed EFSP-H spending data, which
prevented us from testing for potential duplication between EFSP-H and SSP during the
overlapping timeframes.

Figure 1. EFSP-H and SSP Overlapping Periods of Performance




Source: DHS OIG analysis of FEMA data

FEMA and the National Board relied on self-certifications because they did not establish and
implement a review process to prevent duplication of funding between EFSP-H and SSP
grants and did not collect detailed information, including a detailed breakdown of EFSP-H
funding amounts by service cost categories, that would have made such a review possible.

As a result, FEMA has limited assurance that it prevented duplication of funding between
EFSP-H and SSP grant awards. Without improved oversight during the grant closeout process,
FEMA faces an increased risk of duplication between EFSP-H and SSP payments.




www.oig.dhs.gov                               8                                      OIG-26-04
                             OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                               U.S. Department of Homeland Security


                                    Recommendations
Recommendation 1: We recommend the Director of FEMA’s Individual Assistance Division
ensure the National Board resolves the $425 million in questioned costs associated with the
Emergency Food and Shelter Program-Humanitarian Relief funding during the grant closeout
process by collecting supporting documentation, determining whether the costs are
allowable, and recouping any costs that are not allowable.

Recommendation 2: We recommend the Assistant Administrator of FEMA’s Grant Programs
Directorate resolve the $16.5 million in questioned costs associated with the Shelter and Services
Program funding identified in our report. FEMA should collect supporting documentation,
determine whether the costs are allowable, recoup any costs that are not allowable, and upload
the necessary information to the FEMA Grants Outcomes system of record.

Recommendation 3: We recommend the Assistant Administrator of FEMA’s Grant Programs
Directorate review payment requests during the grant closeout process for all Shelter and
Services Program awards in FY 2023 and FY 2024 to minimize the reimbursement of
unsupported costs. FEMA should collect supporting documentation, determine whether the
costs are allowable, and upload the necessary information to the FEMA Grants Outcomes
system of record.

Recommendation 4: We recommend the Assistant Administrator of FEMA’s Grant Programs
Directorate develop and implement controls to ensure FEMA officials and grant recipients use
FEMA Grants Outcomes as the system of record to maintain required documentation
supporting all phases of the grants management lifecycle.

Recommendation 5: We recommend the Director of FEMA’s Individual Assistance Division and
the Assistant Administrator of FEMA’s Grant Programs Directorate establish a review process
to ensure there was no duplication of FY 2023 funding between the Emergency Food and
Shelter Program-Humanitarian Relief and the Shelter and Services Program. FEMA should
recoup any duplicate payments identified.

                      Management Comments and OIG Analysis
FEMA provided management comments on a draft of this report. FEMA concurred with all
five recommendations, which we consider open and resolved. Appendix B contains a copy of
FEMA’s response in its entirety. FEMA also provided technical comments to our draft report.
We incorporated these comments in our report, as appropriate. A summary of FEMA’s
response to the recommendations and our analysis follows.




www.oig.dhs.gov                                9                                       OIG-26-04
                            OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                               U.S. Department of Homeland Security


FEMA disagreed with some of the findings in our report related to the questioned costs we
identified during our review of sampled SSP grant payments. Specifically, FEMA disagreed
that it made calculation errors when examining A-Number records, resulting in $5.6 million in
questioned costs. FEMA also disagreed that it did not ensure invoices submitted for three
payments included sufficient detail to support the claimed costs, resulting in $3.1 million in
questioned costs. Our analysis showed that FEMA did not always accurately calculate the
allowable costs and maintain sufficient documentation to support the claimed costs, as
required. Therefore, we stand by our conclusion and the questioned costs.

FEMA Response to Recommendation 1: Concur. FEMA’s Individual Assistance Division will
work to close out the EFSP-H grant program and resolve the $425 million in questioned costs.
Pursuant to 2 C.F.R. Section 200.344, the National Board must submit a closeout package to
FEMA that includes all final financial, performance, and other reports and documentation.
FEMA’s Individual Assistance Division will complete a closeout review by collecting supporting
documentation, determining whether the costs are allowable, and recouping any costs that
are not allowable. Estimated completion date: December 31, 2026.

OIG Analysis: We consider these actions responsive to the recommendation, which is open
and resolved. The recommendation will remain open until FEMA submits documentation
showing the completion of these corrective actions.

FEMA Response to Recommendation 2: Concur. FEMA’s Grant Programs Directorate will
continue to collect supporting documentation during the closeout phase to determine
whether final payment request costs are allowable as part of the payment review process. All
previous and final payments will be reviewed before awards are closed out. If it is
determined that any costs are not allowable, all options will be pursued to recoup those
costs, as appropriate, and the necessary documentation will be uploaded to FEMA GO.
Estimated Completion Date: September 30, 2026.

OIG Analysis: We consider these actions responsive to the recommendation, which is open
and resolved. The recommendation will remain open until FEMA submits documentation
showing it has resolved the $16.5 million in questioned costs associated with the SSP funding
identified in our report.

FEMA Response to Recommendation 3: Concur. As part of the SSP closeout process, and in
accordance with chapter 6 of FEMA Manual 205-0-1, FEMA will continue to review all previous
and final payment requests for allowability. FEMA will implement internal SSP award
closeout procedures addressing how it will verify that costs and service dates are within the
period of performance, and ensure all documents are uploaded to FEMA GO. In addition, the
payment request will be routed to FEMA and DHS leadership for final determination, as
appropriate. Estimated Completion Date: September 30, 2026.


www.oig.dhs.gov                               10                                      OIG-26-04
                           OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                              U.S. Department of Homeland Security


OIG Analysis: We consider these actions responsive to the recommendation, which is open
and resolved. The recommendation will remain open until FEMA submits documentation
showing the completion of these corrective actions.

FEMA Response to Recommendation 4: Concur. FEMA’s Grant Programs Directorate
implemented controls to address this matter and will provide them to DHS OIG for reference.
The FY 2023 SSP NOFO identifies FEMA GO as the system of record for SSP. Recipients already
must use FEMA GO to submit their quarterly reports, amendments, and payment requests. To
strengthen oversight, FEMA’s Grant Programs Directorate is implementing both a “Payment
Request Reviewer Guide” and a “Payment Review Checklist,” which provide clear instructions
for ensuring supporting documentation is attached within FEMA GO and for reviewing and
reconciling reimbursement requests to ensure compliance and accuracy. Estimated
Completion Date: February 27, 2026.

OIG Analysis: We consider these actions responsive to the recommendation, which is open
and resolved. The recommendation will remain open until FEMA submits documentation
showing the completion of these corrective actions.

FEMA Response to Recommendation 5: Concur. FEMA’s Individual Assistance Division will
establish a review process to ensure there was no duplication of FY 2023 funding between
EFSP-H and SSP. As the EFSP-H FY 2023 period of performance ends on September 30, 2026,
FEMA will not be able to implement a review process until the National Board provides the
closeout package and the program is officially closed. Once this process is complete, FEMA’s
Individual Assistance Division will complete a sampling analysis to identify any duplicate
payments and recoup those funds, as appropriate. Estimated Completion Date: December 31,
2026.

OIG Analysis: We consider these actions responsive to the recommendation, which is open
and resolved. The recommendation will remain open until FEMA submits documentation
showing the completion of these corrective actions.




www.oig.dhs.gov                             11                                     OIG-26-04
                                    OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                                       U.S. Department of Homeland Security


Appendix A:
Objective, Scope, and Methodology
The objective of this audit was to determine the extent to which FEMA ensured non-Federal
entities used EFSP-H and SSP funding in FYs 2023 and 2024 in compliance with applicable laws
and regulations. To answer our objective, we reviewed applicable Federal laws and regulations
along with DHS, FEMA, CBP, and National Board policies, procedures, and guidance associated
with the allocation, award, and administration of EFSP-H and SSP funding. We also reviewed
DHS OIG and U.S. Government Accountability Office reports, relevant media articles,
congressional testimonies, and DHS NOFOs.

To understand the Department’s process related to allocating, awarding, and administering
EFSP-H and SSP funding, we interviewed officials from:

       •    FEMA’s Individual Assistance Division, Grant Programs Directorate, Office of the Chief
            Financial Officer, Office of Chief Counsel, and Office of the Chief Security Officer
       •    CBP’s Operations Support Office and Policy Directorate
       •    National Board’s Fiscal Agent and Secretariat
       •    DHS’ Office of Intelligence and Analysis and Office of the Chief Financial Officer

We analyzed the universe of humanitarian relief funds awarded to non-Federal entities
through EFSP-H and SSP grants in FYs 2023 and 2024. We selected a non-statistical,
judgmental sample of seven SSP payments totaling $48.2 million, representing a portion of
the $55.6 million in total payments made in FYs 2023 and 2024, as of September 30, 2024.
We reviewed supporting documentation uploaded to FEMA GO to determine whether the
expenses claimed were reasonable in nature and amount, allocable to the FEMA award,
included in the approved budget, and adequately documented.

We evaluated the actions taken by FEMA and the National Board to implement
recommendation 2 from our 2023 report,23 which aimed to improve oversight of EFSP-H
spending by reducing risk, increasing transparency, and allowing for sample reviews of
ongoing expenditures. To assess whether implementation efforts achieved the desired
results, we interviewed program officials and requested copies of the Board’s quarterly
spending reports, which were expected to include a breakdown of the obligations,
expenditures, and remaining balances by service category for each EFSP-H subaward.
However, because FEMA did not ensure the Board established and implemented a system to
collect the quarterly reports, we did not conduct further testing in this area.




23
     FEMA Should Increase Oversight to Prevent Misuse of Humanitarian Relief Funds, OIG-23-20, March 28, 2023.


www.oig.dhs.gov                                         12                                            OIG-26-04
                             OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                               U.S. Department of Homeland Security


We assessed the reliability of computer-processed data obtained from FEMA GO, FEMA’s
Integrated Financial Management Information System, as well as separate spreadsheets
manually created by FEMA and National Board officials to track allocations, award
obligations, and expenditures related to humanitarian funding provided to aliens through
EFSP-H and SSP grants in FYs 2023 and 2024. To test data reliability, we traced and
compared reported amounts to source documentation, including grant files, financial system
reports, and other corroborating evidence. We determined the data was sufficiently reliable
for the purposes of our audit.

We assessed internal controls related to FEMA’s oversight of humanitarian funding for aliens
and identified internal control components and underlying internal control principles that
were significant to the audit objective. Specifically, we identified weaknesses for the control
environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication, and
monitoring control components. These internal control weaknesses are discussed in the
body of this report. However, because we limited our assessment to the audit objective, the
report may not have disclosed all internal control deficiencies that may have existed at the
time of our audit.

We conducted this audit from June 2024 through September 2025 pursuant to the Inspector
General Act of 1978, 5 U.S.C. §§ 401–424, and according to generally accepted government
auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.

DHS OIG’s Access to DHS Information

FEMA denied DHS OIG direct, read-only access to the FEMA GO back-end database because it
was not possible to partition the data access to only those records FEMA deemed relevant to
the audit. In lieu of direct system access, after multiple delays, FEMA provided us with full
copies of the raw data tables for all FY 2023 and 2024 SSP grants. The delays caused by the
denial of direct FEMA GO access and subsequently obtaining extracts negatively impacted
our timeliness in performing this audit. Subsequently, we obtained direct, read-only access
to SSP award records for FYs 2023 and 2024 through the FEMA GO front-end interface.




www.oig.dhs.gov                                13                                      OIG-26-04
                     OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                       U.S. Department of Homeland Security


Appendix B:
FEMA Comments on the Draft Report




www.oig.dhs.gov                      14                       OIG-26-04
                  OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                   U.S. Department of Homeland Security




www.oig.dhs.gov                  15                       OIG-26-04
                  OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                   U.S. Department of Homeland Security




www.oig.dhs.gov                  16                       OIG-26-04
                  OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                   U.S. Department of Homeland Security




www.oig.dhs.gov                  17                       OIG-26-04
                  OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                   U.S. Department of Homeland Security




www.oig.dhs.gov                  18                       OIG-26-04
                  OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                   U.S. Department of Homeland Security




www.oig.dhs.gov                  19                       OIG-26-04
                             OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                                U.S. Department of Homeland Security


Appendix C:
Potential Monetary Benefits

Category of          Unsupported        Ineligible         Total   Funds to Be
Humanitarian               Costs            Costs    Questioned         Put to
Funding               Questioned       Questioned         Costs     Better Use   Rec No.
EFSP-H                     $425 M              $0        $425 M            $0         1
SSP                        $16.5 M             $0        $16.5 M           $0         2
Totals                    $441.5 M             $0      $441.5 M            $0       N/A
Source: DHS OIG analysis of FEMA records




www.oig.dhs.gov                                20                                  OIG-26-04
                           OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL
                             U.S. Department of Homeland Security


Appendix D:
Report Distribution
Department of Homeland Security

Secretary
Deputy Secretary
Chief of Staff
Deputy Chiefs of Staff
General Counsel
Executive Secretary
Director, GAO/OIG Liaison Office
Under Secretary, Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans
Under Secretary for Management
Assistant Secretary for Office of Public Affairs
Assistant Secretary for Office of Legislative Affairs
Administrator, Federal Emergency Management Agency
Associate Administrator, FEMA Office of Resilience
Associate Administrator, FEMA Office of Response and Recovery
Assistant Administrator, FEMA Grant Programs Directorate
Assistant Administrator, FEMA Recovery Directorate
Director, FEMA Individual Assistance Division
Commissioner, U.S. Customs and Border Protection
FEMA Audit Liaison Office
CBP Audit Liaison Office

Office of Management and Budget

Chief, Homeland Security Branch
DHS OIG Budget Examiner

Congress

Congressional Oversight and Appropriations Committees




www.oig.dhs.gov                            21                       OIG-26-04
                                 Additional Information
To view this and any other DHS OIG reports, Please visit our website: www.oig.dhs.gov

For further information or questions, please contact the DHS OIG Office of Public Affairs via email:
DHS-OIG.OfficePublicAffairs@oig.dhs.gov




                                     DHS OIG Hotline
 To report fraud, waste, abuse, or criminal misconduct involving U.S. Department of Homeland
        Security programs, personnel, and funds, please visit: www.oig.dhs.gov/hotline

         If you cannot access our website, please contact the hotline by phone or mail:

                                      Call: 1-800-323-8603

                                            U.S. Mail:
                               Department of Homeland Security
                           Office of Inspector General, Mail Stop 0305
                                        Attention: Hotline
                                       245 Murray Drive SW
                                   Washington, DC 20528-0305
