A BROKEN AID SYSTEM:

DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO
TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

August 2025

Cover photo: A Taliban security officer stands guard as Afghan burqa-clad women wait in queue in the midst of a downpour
to receive food supplies donated during the Islamic holy fasting month of Ramadan, in Kabul on March 25, 2025. (AFP
photo by Wakil Kohsar)

Special Inspector General

for Afghanistan Reconstruction

Between the Taliban taking power in August 2021 and the Department of State canceling
most aid to Afghanistan in 2025, donors had provided $10.72 billion in humanitarian and
development aid to benefit the Afghan people. Of that, $3.83 billion, or about 36 percent,
came from the United States, which was, until recently, Afghanistan’s largest donor.
Policymakers and members of Congress have raised questions about how much of that
U.S. taxpayer-funded aid wound up in the Taliban’s hands.
SIGAR has issued five reports that examine the various ways the Taliban have benefited
from U.S. assistance:
• Cash Shipments to Afghanistan: The UN Has Purchased and Transported More
than $2.9 Billion to Afghanistan to Implement Humanitarian Assistance (SIGAR24-12-IP), January 2024
• U.S. Funds Benefitting the Taliban-Controlled Government: Implementing Partners
Paid at Least $10.9 Million and Were Pressured to Divert Assistance (SIGAR-24-22AR), May 2024
• U.S. Currency Shipments to Afghanistan: UN Shipments Stabilized the Afghan
Economy but Benefit the Taliban (SIGAR-24-32-IP), July 2024
• Public International Organizations in Afghanistan: State and USAID Agreements
with PIOs Need Strengthening to Ensure U.S. Funds are Not Diverted to Terrorist
Groups (SIGAR-25-16-AR), March 2025
• Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) with Taliban-Led Ministries: State
Department’s Implementing Partners’ MOUs Have Had Mixed Effect on Assistance
Delivery (SIGAR-25-22-AR), April 2025
This report looks at how the Taliban diverts U.S. aid dollars intended for needy Afghans
and the culture of denial within the international aid community, which thwarts effective
measures to mitigate that diversion. SIGAR found Taliban interference takes multiple
forms—including diverting aid to Taliban-favored groups, using their regulatory power to
choose which nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) are permitted to operate, extorting
NGO staff, and colluding with senior UN officials to demand kickbacks from UN vendors.
This report would not have been possible without the input of almost 90 people who spoke
to SIGAR about the challenges of delivering aid to people living under the Taliban and
similar regimes, as well as the pervasive problem of aid diversion. These individuals came
from a wide range of backgrounds, including current and former U.S. government officials,
UN officials, NGO officials, former Afghan government officials, businessmen, and others.
Due in part to the politically sensitive nature of aid diversion, most of these interviewees
wished to remain anonymous. Many of them risked their livelihoods to speak with SIGAR
and expose aid diversion, while some Afghans still in Afghanistan risked their lives.
2530 CRYSTAL DRIVE, ARLINGTON, VIRGINIA 22202

SIGAR owes them all a debt of gratitude for their courage. Unfortunately, SIGAR was told
that one source, an employee of an Afghan NGO, was killed for exposing the diversion
of food aid to Taliban military training camps. Before becoming a SIGAR source, he had
been documenting the delivery of food to one of these camps for another organization
and was captured by the Taliban. He escaped and shared his story with SIGAR while
on the run. SIGAR was later told—but could not confirm—that the Taliban eventually
recaptured and killed him.
U.S. foreign assistance is currently undergoing a significant reevaluation and reform
effort. In January 2025, President Donald Trump announced a 90-day pause in foreign
assistance, during which the administration reviewed all aid programs to determine
whether they would make America “safer,” “stronger,” and “more prosperous.” The State
Department announced that it would make limited exceptions for lifesaving programs,
which would be allowed to continue during this pause. In February, President Trump
issued an executive order announcing a 180-day review of U.S. membership in and
funding to all international organizations. In March 2025, the Department of State notified
Congress that it intended to “undertake a reorganization that would involve realigning
certain USAID functions to the Department,” and “discontinuing the remaining USAID
functions that do not align with Administration priorities,” by July 1, 2025. By April 2025,
the United States government had terminated most foreign assistance to Afghanistan.
Should the United States restart aid to Afghanistan, this report provides guidance on how
to reduce diversion and improve effectiveness. This report’s findings may also be relevant
for aid going to any other place where people live under hostile governments, such as
Gaza, Sudan, and Houthi-controlled territories of Yemen.

Gene Aloise,
Acting Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction
Arlington, Virginia

2530 CRYSTAL DRIVE, ARLINGTON, VIRGINIA 22202

TABLE OF CONTENTS | A BROKEN AID SYSTEM

LETTER FROM THE INSPECTOR GENERAL

I

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

V

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

1

The Complexity of Global Aid Distribution Creates Oversight Challenges
and Increases Costs. .........................................................................................2
Ambiguity about What Constitutes Aid Diversion Creates Uncertainty among
U.S. and International Partners. .........................................................................5
State and USAID Officials Have, in the Past, Denied that Diversion Occurs. .......7
Aid Diversion Enriches and Empowers Hostile Regimes. ....................................8
The Taliban Are Skeptical of Aid They Perceive as Counter to Their Values,
Experts Say........................................................................................................8
Afghanistan Remains One of the World’s Poorest Countries.............................10

CHAPTER 2

THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO DIVERT AID

13

The Taliban Profit from UN Corruption, According to Interviewees.....................15
The Taliban Use Their Intelligence Service to Divert Aid, Sometimes by Force...18
Aid Diversion Also Takes the Form of Interference with the Selection of NGO
Partners, Vendors, and Staff.............................................................................19
The Taliban Divert Aid by Taxing and Extorting NGOs.........................................24
The Taliban Use Diverted Aid to Reward Their Supporters.................................25
Aid Enables the Taliban to Cut Spending on Social Services............................28
CHAPTER 3

THE TALIBAN MAY USE CASH SHIPMENTS AND EXCHANGE
RATE MANIPULATION TO TURN AID INTO PROFIT

31

Despite UN Assurances, Dollars End Up in the Taliban-Controlled
Central Bank....................................................................................................34
The Taliban May Have Profited by Manipulating Exchange Rates and
Rigging Currency Auctions of Imported U.S. Dollars..........................................34
There Is No Longer Any International Oversight of the Afghan Central Bank......35
CHAPTER 4

CURRENT DONOR STRATEGIES FOR DELIVERING AID ARE
INSUFFICIENT TO PREVENT DIVERSION

39

Policies Prohibiting Engagement with the Taliban Ignore the Reality
That Aid Cannot Be Delivered without It...........................................................40
Donors Have Strict Zero Tolerance Policies about Aid Diversion, But
Enforcement Is Inconsistent.............................................................................40
Donors Disagree on How to Engage the Taliban. ..............................................46
The U.S. Government Has Historically Had the Least Oversight of Aid
to the Riskiest Places. .....................................................................................49
There Are Risks and Benefits to the U.S. Government’s Reliance on
the UN to Deliver Aid in Risky Places. ..............................................................50

TABLE OF CONTENTS | A BROKEN AID SYSTEM

CHAPTER 5

LESSONS FROM THE U.S. EXPERIENCE IN AFGHANISTAN CAN
HELP INFORM FOREIGN AID REFORM

55

Donors, UN Agencies Disagree about What Types of Programming and
Engagement Are Appropriate under Hostile Regimes, Such as the Taliban. ......56
The World Bank Has a Strategy for Dealing with Hostile Regimes; the
UN’s Guidance May Be Insufficient..................................................................57
USAID, UN, and NGO Officials Told SIGAR that Funneling Aid through the
UN before It Reaches NGOs Comes with Risks. ...............................................58

CHAPTER 6

CONCLUSION

69

Recommendations. .........................................................................................71

APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

73

Methodology. ..................................................................................................73
Comments from the Department of State........................................................76
Abbreviations...................................................................................................81
Endnotes.........................................................................................................82
Acknowledgments. ....................................................................................... 104

FIGURES
Fig. 1: How to Implement a Project Under the Taliban...............................................................21
Fig. 2: Contradictions between UN Regulations and Taliban Laws and Guidance. .....................41
Fig. 3: Tankhaa: An Alternative Mechanism for Getting Money to Afghanistan............................66

HIGHLIGHT AND CALLOUT BOXES
In Iraq, the UN Development Programme Was Involved in a Kickback Scheme..........................16
Hostile Regimes Often Interfere in Aid Delivery. .......................................................................19
Aid Allows Estranged Regimes to Shift Spending from Social Services to Repression. ..............29
Currency Conversion Also Offers Opportunities for Aid Diversion Elsewhere...............................33
Yemen: Example of an Aid Suspension That Worked.................................................................63
What Are Hawalas?..................................................................................................................65

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

B

etween the Taliban taking power in August 2021 and the Department of State canceling
most aid to Afghanistan in 2025, donors had provided $10.72 billion in humanitarian and
development aid to the country. Of that, $3.83 billion, or about 36 percent, came from the
United States, which was, until recently, the largest donor to Afghanistan.
This report looks at the challenges of providing aid to people in need living under hostile
regimes—like the Taliban—that divert aid for their own purposes. It also looks at how
perverse incentives in the global system of delivering aid exacerbate the problem.
Finally, it looks at how the multiple organizations involved in aid delivery ultimately
dilute aid through numerous—and often opaque—layers of bureaucracy, each imposing
administrative fees.
Aid diversion is a chronic worldwide problem that enriches and empowers hostile
regimes. These regimes can divert aid because nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)
are dependent on state consent to do their jobs. Regimes use many different methods
to direct aid to their supporters and away from populations they view as enemies.
Paradoxically, the same aid that feeds hungry people can also fuel a war economy. NGOs
rely on vendors, including transport companies, landlords, and financial institutions
that are often owned by parties to the conflict. The longer the war goes on, the longer
humanitarian aid flows, the richer these vendors get.
In Afghanistan, SIGAR found that the Taliban use every means at their disposal,
including force, to ensure that aid goes where they want it to go, as opposed to where
donors intend. The Taliban use their regulatory power to determine which NGOs may
operate, and under what conditions; they block and redirect aid to ensure that it benefits
Pashtun communities and not Hazara or Tajik communities; and they refuse to allow
NGOs to operate unless they hire Taliban-affiliated businesses, NGOs, and individuals.
The Taliban may also manipulate exchange rates and rig currency auctions of imported
U.S. dollars for profit. They may also collude with senior UN officials to demand
kickbacks from UN vendors. A 2023 United States Institute of Peace report found that
the Taliban had infiltrated and influenced most UN-managed assistance programs.
Officially, the U.S. government and other donors maintain that none of their money is
going to the Taliban. In reality, a combination of funding pressures and public relations
concerns encourage organizations to conceal how much of their aid winds up in places
it was not intended to go. One implementing partner estimated that after all the layers
of taxes, fees, bribery, and extortion, “maybe around 30 to 40 percent” of donor funds
actually reached the population. Facing pressure to demonstrate success and avoid
scandal, donors provide little to no support to their partners in dealing with diversion;
partners are incentivized to downplay or hide instances of diversion to maintain their
funding and access to beneficiaries.

AUGUST 2025 | V

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

Officials at State and the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) have
also, in the past, denied that diversion occurs. After the Taliban takeover, U.S. officials
repeatedly insisted that aid was not being diverted and did not benefit the regime.
They made these denials despite a 2021 USAID OIG memorandum documenting
three separate investigations into allegations of diversion—two instances of which
occurred during the implementation of USAID-funded projects—including payments
to the Taliban for safe access to specific regions of the country and interference into
procurement and beneficiary selection at a major international NGO. In a 2024 audit,
SIGAR found that U.S. implementing partners had paid at least $10.9 million to the
Taliban in taxes, fees, duties, and utilities—payments allowable under U.S. law when
necessary for the delivery of aid. This was likely a fraction of the true amount because
UN agencies receiving U.S. funds did not collect data on, or provide information about,
payments made by the NGOs and other partners they funded.
SIGAR found that the global system of delivering aid to people living under hostile
regimes, like the Taliban, is broken. The system is costly and overly complex, involving
multiple onion-like layers of UN agencies, NGOs, and subcontractors. Because aid often
flows through many different organizations before reaching beneficiaries, administrative
costs may in some cases constitute more than half of the budget of an aid program. Each
layer drives up costs, reducing the benefit to intended recipients like the Afghan people.
Each layer also creates new opportunities for malign actors to divert aid or otherwise
engage in corruption. The multitude of layers reduces overall transparency and makes it
difficult for aid to be adjusted or modified in response to changing needs or conditions.
Finally, in the course of researching this report, SIGAR repeatedly encountered allegations
that UN officials demand bribes in exchange for issuing contracts to companies and NGOs.
Most of the allegations SIGAR heard involved employees of the World Food Programme,
which has been the largest single recipient of both U.S. and overall aid to Afghanistan
since the Taliban takeover. However, SIGAR also heard similar allegations about staff
working for eight other UN agencies. Interviewees told SIGAR that:
• UN officials demand bribes from companies and NGOs seeking contracts from their
agencies. The bribes are calculated as a percentage of the contract at stake, with
estimates varying between 5 and 50 percent.
• UN staff handpick winning contractors before the official bidding process begins.
• UN staff condition their award decisions on demands that contractors hire family
members as subcontractors and their preferred individuals as staff. Several
interviewees told SIGAR that UN staff steer business to local NGOs in which they
have ownership stakes.
• Taliban officials collude with UN officials to extort bribes from UN contractors and
then split the profit.
• Major UN contractors provide “direct support to the Taliban in terms of cash, food,
and even logistical support.”
• Taliban officials use their influence over NGOs to direct funding to parts of the
country where their supporters live.
• UN agencies pay the Taliban to provide security—a practice the UN has defended

VI | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

as necessary to protect its employees. But paying the Taliban for security is
controversial among some UN agencies and the broader aid community. According
to SIGAR’s sources, certain UN agencies were quick to agree to the Taliban’s
demands that they pay for armed escorts, while others were opposed. One NGO
official criticized the UN payments as “formalized bribery,” and alleged that the UN’s
acquiescence put pressure on NGOs to follow suit.
The U.S. government passes substantial amounts of aid to people living under hostile
regimes through the UN. The extent of U.S. government reliance on the UN may have
unintended consequences, including limiting visibility of how funds are ultimately used
and increasing risk that it benefits hostile regimes.
Finally, humanitarian aid—which is intended to allow for a rapid, life-saving response to
emergencies—is subject to fewer laws and regulations than development aid—which is
intended to build enduring systems and structures over a longer period. Given the magnitude of
humanitarian aid flowing through the UN in places like Afghanistan, an important consequence
is that the United States often has the least oversight in the places where it needs it the most.
U.S. foreign assistance is currently undergoing a significant reevaluation and reform
effort. Should the United States restart aid to Afghanistan, this report provides guidance
on how to reduce diversion and improve its effectiveness. Its findings may also be
relevant for aid going to other places where people live under hostile regimes, such as
Gaza, Sudan, and Houthi-controlled territories of Yemen.

RECOMMENDATIONS
1.

2.

3.

To ensure that aid benefits both taxpayers and beneficiaries and is not wasted by
the UN, the Secretary of State should ensure that U.S. agencies administered by the
Secretary—namely the Department of State, USAID, or former USAID entities—
involved with providing, administering, or auditing the aid have full access to UN
performance and financial reporting and the right to conduct unrestricted and
unannounced site visits and/or utilize third-party monitors for U.S.-funded projects.
This should apply to all types of aid including emergency and humanitarian aid
provided in response to a disaster or other crisis.
As shown in this report, aid passes through numerous UN agencies and NGOs that
each deduct administrative costs before it reaches beneficiaries. Therefore, the
Secretary of State should limit the number of organizations that aid passes through
before reaching beneficiaries. This may require regulatory, oversight, funding cycle,
procurement, and staffing reforms.
As part of the ongoing reorganization of the Department of State and reform of
foreign assistance, the Secretary of State should ensure that Department staff
administering aid receive training in risk management and the mitigation of aid
diversion—two critical functions for which State is ultimately responsible.

AUGUST 2025 | VII

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

AGENCY COMMENTS
SIGAR sent a draft of this report to the Department of State and the U.S. Agency for
International Development, both of which provided technical comments that SIGAR
incorporated as appropriate.
State’s Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs provided formal comments, reproduced
in Appendix II. In those comments, State concurred with Recommendation 2, “generally”
concurred with recommendations 1 and 3, and noted that it would examine the
applicability of SIGAR’s recommendations to environments other than Afghanistan. State
also suggested language modifications that would bring about its full concurrence with
recommendations 1 and 3.
SIGAR accommodated the changes suggested by State in all but one instance. State’s
preferred language for Recommendation 3 reflected the view that ensuring adequate
monitoring and risk management of U.S.-funded projects was a responsibility
shared between State and implementing organizations. Although SIGAR agrees that
both State and its implementers bear responsibility for mitigating diversion risk, it
disagrees that responsibility should be fully “shared.” Accordingly, the final version of
Recommendation 3 above reflects SIGAR’s view that State is ultimately responsible for
the efficacy of its assistance programs and for preventing diversion.

VIII | EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

B

etween the Taliban’s seizure of power in August 2021 and the U.S. government’s
suspension of all aid to Afghanistan in 2025, donors provided $10.72 billion in aid.
Of that, $3.83 billion, or about 36 percent, came from the United States, which was, until
recently, the largest donor to the Afghan people.1 U.S. government officials and members
of Congress have raised questions about how much of that U.S. taxpayer-funded aid has
wound up in the Taliban’s hands.
Under the prior, U.S.-supported government, Afghan elites pocketed hundreds of
millions of foreign aid dollars—mostly from the United States—by steering contracts to
their own companies, creating jobs for friends and relatives, failing to do the work they
were paid for, or simply stealing.2 Incidents of diversion have been heavily documented
in multiple SIGAR reports, the media, and other publications.3 While aid diversion was
a serious problem under the previous Afghan government, it is even more problematic
when these funds wind up in the coffers of a hostile regime, like the Taliban.
Aid diversion affects more than just U.S. assistance to Afghanistan—it is a worldwide
problem. In recent years, donors have sent a greater portion of their aid to people
living in places controlled by hostile regimes, where extreme poverty is increasingly
concentrated.4 The World Bank has predicted that by 2030, one-third of all humanitarian
aid would go to such places.5

AUGUST 2025 | 1

Internally displaced Afghan
women line up to receive
food relief aid from the
World Food Programme in
Kabul on January 13, 2015.
(AFP photo by Shah Marai)

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

Aid to Afghanistan and other places ruled by hostile regimes is not purely altruistic.6
The United States and other donors use foreign aid to try to curb the flow of refugees
that might otherwise land on their borders.7 The world is in the midst of the worst
displacement crisis ever recorded.8 Countries controlled by hostile regimes, like the
Taliban, or regimes that the United States has sanctioned produce an outsized share
of global refugees. In 2024, of the five countries that produced the most refugees, four
could be characterized this way: Syria, Afghanistan, South Sudan, and Myanmar.9 This
has long-term implications, as once refugees have fled their country, they generally
remain displaced for decades.10
Congress and the U.S. Agency for International Development’s Office of Inspector
General (USAID OIG) have expressed concern about the risk of aid diversion in
Afghanistan and similar contexts.11 USAID OIG issued an alert in September 2021,
less than a month after the Taliban takeover, warning that Taliban interference posed
significant challenges to aid delivery. The letter documented instances in which the
regime allegedly diverted U.S. aid during the implementation of two USAID-funded
projects.12 In a January 2022 joint letter, the chairmen and ranking members of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Foreign Affairs Committee
expressed similar concerns about U.S. aid to Syria under the Assad regime.13

THE COMPLEXITY OF GLOBAL AID DISTRIBUTION CREATES
OVERSIGHT CHALLENGES AND INCREASES COSTS
When the U.S. and other donors are trying to deliver aid to people living under hostile
regimes like the Taliban, they tend to send their aid through a long and complex chain
of onion-like layers of contractors and sub-contractors.14 Aid money is often first sent
to a UN agency or other multilateral organization—such as the World Bank—which
then awards funding to an international NGO—such as Save the Children or CARE.
These international NGOs usually subcontract to local NGOs, which actually deliver
the aid to beneficiaries. (Between the Taliban takeover and the State Department’s
2025 termination of almost all aid to Afghanistan, 64 percent of U.S. aid to Afghanistan
has flowed first through multinational organizations.)15 Most of the rest of U.S. foreign
assistance has historically flowed through big international NGOs before being provided
to smaller local NGOs.16
Aid money sometimes goes through several multilateral organizations before it even
makes it to an NGO. For example, sometimes aid money goes first to the World
Bank, which then routes it to the UN; sometimes it gets routed through multiple UN
agencies before it is sent to an international NGO.17 For example, as of 2023, the
Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund, administered by the UN’s Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), awarded almost two-thirds of its funding not directly to
NGOs but to other UN agencies first.18 In some cases, the UN agency administering the
collective funds of several donor countries awards money to itself.19

2 | INTRODUCTION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

Each time that money passes through a UN agency, the agency collects a percentage
to cover its management and administrative costs, even when it is simply acting as
a pass-through for routing the funds elsewhere.20 A 2025 SIGAR audit of multilateral
organizations in Afghanistan found that overhead costs ranged from 6.5 percent for
the World Food Programme (WFP) to 14 percent for the Colombo Plan.21 This may be
an undercount. A 2019 study conducted by the previous Afghan government’s Ministry
of Finance found that from 2016 to 2018, UN overhead costs averaged 23 percent.22
Because aid often flows through many different organizations before reaching
beneficiaries, the administrative costs charged by multilateral organizations are often
just one of several overhead charges applied to the budget of a single program.
According to a 2024 Congressional Research Service (CRS) report, administrative costs
may constitute as much as half or more of the total cost of an aid program.23 The report
cited a 2021 estimate by a group of development experts that administrative costs and
company profits may total 50 percent for some of the U.S. government’s implementing
partners.24 A study of global health programs by the University of Washington found
that international NGOs apply overhead costs of 15 to 30 percent of their total budget
to cover the cost of rent and general administrative staff. The same report found that
another 15 to 30 percent goes to paying the salaries of the headquarters staff assigned
to each specific project. These staff provide the technical oversight necessary to meet
donor demands for “extensive and stringent programmatic and financial reporting.”
The researcher concluded, therefore, that more than half of international NGO funding
disappears before it even leaves headquarters.25
The U.S. government often passes its funding through UN agencies and/or international
NGOs because those organizations are better equipped to comply with the myriad
and onerous U.S. regulations governing foreign assistance. According to former
USAID Afghanistan Mission Director Patrick Fine, U.S. congressional and regulatory
requirements have necessitated the creation of purpose-built implementing partners
who specialize in fulfilling complex compliance and reporting requirements.26 According
to an aid expert writing for the Brookings Institution, local NGOs specialize in providing
technical services, but are not capable of meeting “safety and environmental standards,
terrorist and money laundering reporting requirements, reimbursement for rejected or
questioned costs, and other U.S. and local rules and regulations.”27
In an attempt to address concerns about high overhead costs, former USAID
Administrator Samantha Power pledged in 2021 that by 2025 a quarter of all USAID
funding would go directly to local partner organizations.28 She was not the first USAID
administrator to set such a goal, which dates back at least to the Clinton administration’s
endorsement of the Millenium Development Goals.29 Former administrator Rajiv Shah
set a goal of 30 percent during the Obama administration, and the same push was a core
goal of former administrator Mark Green’s Journey to Self-Reliance under the first Trump
administration.30 But although there has been a slight increase, the percentage of USAID
money going directly to local partners remained at just 10 percent, as of January 2025.31

AUGUST 2025 | 3

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

Calculating how much overall aid actually reaches people in need is very complex, in
part because the UN is resistant to financial transparency. Other factors include which
implementing partner is involved, how many layers of bureaucracy have handled the money,
and whether the aid is going to a country that is friendly or hostile to the United States.32
In Afghanistan, foreign aid has long flowed through layers of bureaucracy, creating a
variety of problems. As early as 2007, a United Kingdom-based think tank expressed
concern that the number of middlemen created situations that offered “many
opportunities for corruption.”33 In 2012, a group of Norwegian academics wrote that “the
use of subcontractors as humanitarian actors subcontracting to a subcontractor, who
in turn subcontracts to another subcontractor and so forth,” reduces transparency and
donor control over aid programming.34
The local NGOs that implement aid programs often receive the federally mandated
minimum reimbursement for administrative costs of ten percent (often significantly
lower than reimbursements received by their international counterparts). This is
often insufficient to cover their full operating expenses. According to former USAID
Kabul Mission Director Patrick Fine, the inability of local NGOs to fully recover their
costs also means that they lack sufficient funding to “build and operate effective risk
management systems.” He argues that this insufficient reimbursement results in less
capacity at local NGOs than their international partners, making overseeing them much
more labor intensive for U.S. officials and, thus, creating a massive disincentive to
provide funding directly to them.35
The U.S. government’s inadequate reimbursement of administrative costs incurred by
local organizations creates intense pressure to obtain sufficient funding to sustain their
organizations. It also incentivizes local NGOs to allow the Taliban to interfere with their
work in exchange for permission to continue implementing programs.36 According to a
study by the Centre on Armed Groups, an international research institution, long chains
of subcontractors result in increased risk of diversion and corruption and deprive local
NGOs of the decision-making power necessary to do their jobs effectively.37
Some experts on aid delivery under hostile regimes have called for a more collective
approach to fighting diversion from the donor and aid communities.38 One called for
donors to “engage with the nitty gritty of what is going on.”39 However, at the moment,
donors are rarely involved in supporting their partners to resist regime pressure for
interference and diversion. Instead, by placing pressure on their partners to reach
more beneficiaries in more places faster and rewarding those who do so with career
advancement, more funding, and more contracts, donors incentivize them to agree to
regimes’ diversionary demands in order to get permission to implement programs.40 This
environment discourages collective action in which NGOs band together to push back
against regime demands. In this way, it allows the Taliban to play various UN agencies
and NGOs against each other.41

4 | INTRODUCTION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

The difficulty of tracking money through this intricate multitiered system is compounded
by donors’ reluctance to acknowledge that aid diversion even exists. Even when the
recipient nation is friendly to the United States, any admission that some aid was diverted
could lead to funding cuts. Acknowledging that a hostile regime might be siphoning off aid
could lead to reduced funding for aid organizations or even their closure.42
It is also important to note that donors do not give aid for purely altruistic reasons.
Aid is also a foreign policy tool which can create economic and security benefits
domestically, such as reducing the flow of refugees and helping to maintain regional
stability. A complete aid cutoff could result in the collapse of the Taliban regime, but
that would come with other risks: a return to violence and chaos, more refugees, and an
increased risk of terrorist attacks from groups like the Islamic State-Khorasan, which
the Taliban have been fighting.43 As an Afghanistan expert said, aside from jihadist
groups in the region “no one benefits from a failed state and regional instability.”44

AMBIGUITY ABOUT WHAT CONSTITUTES AID DIVERSION CREATES
UNCERTAINTY AMONG U.S. AND INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS
What constitutes aid diversion often depends on one’s point of view: what donors may
regard as extortion the Taliban might call “collecting taxes.” It is important to have a rough
definition of diversion and to distinguish different types, because some forms are more
problematic for donors than others. Different forms call for different policy responses.
The European Union’s definition of aid diversion is straightforward: “Aid taken, stolen,
or damaged by any governmental or local authority, armed group, or any other similar
actor. Such act is to be considered diverted aid even if the aid is redistributed to other
people in need other than the intended beneficiary group.”45 It is unclear whether
State, USAID, or the UN have formal definitions of their own, although in response to
SIGAR inquiries in 2023, USAID’s Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance gave SIGAR two
different, but roughly similar, definitions on different occasions. The first was “the act
of using for one’s own gain funds, food, commodities, or services intended for those
targeted to receive such assistance.”46 The second was “a type of fraud when it refers to
the act of using, for personal gain, items/food/funds intended for a federal program.”47
The line between diversion and governance can be blurry; what one person might call
extortion may seem to the regime like governance. United Nations policy requires
that aid be provided with the consent of the recipient country and with respect for its
sovereignty.48 This requirement is problematic under hostile regimes, which are often
subject to U.S. and international sanctions. Organizations that have to obtain permission
to work from regime officials fear angering their donors or even facing criminal charges
if they have contact with sanctioned individuals.49
Aid workers and regime officials often have opposing perspectives on the regime’s
role. Aid workers “tend to view any and all of the administrative measures applied to
them (for example, travel permits or reporting requirements) as ‘authoritarian,’ and a

AUGUST 2025 | 5

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

sign of suspicion or even hostility by the state,” according to two humanitarian access
experts with Doctors Without Borders. In contrast, they noted, “Government officials…
[tend] to view such measures as simply doing their assigned job; in their view, these
practices are not about the state avoiding accountability but about the state ensuring the
accountability of NGOs to them.”50
Some Taliban officials are carryovers from the previous internationally-backed and U.S.supported government and thus were accustomed to being consulted on the design and
implementation of aid projects. They object when NGOs present their plans as a fait
accompli and expect the Taliban to sign off. In 2023, the Afghanistan Analysts Network
wrote that the level of distrust between NGOs and the regime had increased so much
under the Taliban that it had “fundamentally changed” their relationship.51
According to a former UN official, the fact that hostile regimes do not have a seat at the
table when donors make decisions about what kind of aid to give and where to send it
incentivizes them to divert it. In countries recognized by aid donors, the government
has a formal role in determining where resources are delivered, and donors sometimes
sign agreements with host governments and design their programs around domestic
priorities. In Afghanistan, said the same former official, “We refuse to consult the
Taliban, so they divert aid because they want something out of it.”52 One donor official
said, “We talk about Taliban interference a lot, [but] if it was coming from a recognized
state, we wouldn’t be so edgy about it.”53
The Taliban have always been suspicious of foreign aid, which has often been
politicized, short-sighted, and prone to corruption.54 They also resent the post-August
2021 shift from long-term development to short-term humanitarian aid, which they
view—as did a 2023 UN independent assessment—as unsustainable and encouraging
dependence.55 Then there is the fact that under the internationally supported Afghan
government, aid was a key part of the counterinsurgency strategy of “winning hearts and
minds.” The theory was that providing the population with jobs, services, and resources
would create support for the government and opposition to the insurgent Taliban.56 The
2006 U.S. Army and Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field Manual that codified this
approach proclaimed that “there is no such thing as impartial humanitarian assistance.”57
As one provincial Taliban official told the Afghanistan Analysts Network, “They killed us
with bombs and bullets when they had power and access, but now when they can’t hit us
anymore, they come and want to rescue us from hunger?”58
Not surprisingly, the Taliban today grapple with how to accept—and control—aid that,
until relatively recently, was delivered with the explicit intent of undermining their rule.
According to the United States Institute of Peace, the Taliban are more likely to tolerate
aid when they “can claim a degree of credit for providing benefits to communities and
closely monitor the organizations providing those benefits.”59
As SIGAR found in the report Why the Afghan Government Collapsed, the United
States empowered a government that, over a 20-year period, was increasingly abusive,

6 | INTRODUCTION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

violent, and corrupt, and which many Afghans saw as illegitimate by the time it
collapsed.60 Several interviewees told SIGAR that aid diversion under the Taliban is just
a continuation of how things worked under the previous government.61

STATE AND USAID OFFICIALS HAVE, IN THE PAST, DENIED THAT
DIVERSION OCCURS
Since the Taliban takeover, U.S. officials have, at times, insisted that aid is not being
diverted to the Taliban and does not benefit their regime. Under the Biden administration,
in response to a formal SIGAR inquiry, a State official asserted that the department
was “not aware of any instances of individual Taliban members or the Taliban as an
organization siphoning funds from humanitarian programs.”62 At a 2022 event at the Center
for Strategic and International Studies, then State Department Special Representative and
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Afghanistan Thomas West said that he was not aware of a
“major problem of misuse or diversion of humanitarian funds.”63 In a January 2023 press
briefing, another State official emphasized that the agency had “gone to great lengths to
continue being the world’s leading humanitarian provider to the people of Afghanistan in a
way that doesn’t flow through the coffers of the Taliban.”64
During a House Foreign Affairs Committee hearing in May 2021, then USAID
Administrator Samantha Power said that the agency had received no reports of aid
being distributed to Taliban-linked groups and expressed confidence in USAID’s ability
to detect it.65 This statement came six months after the agency’s Office of Inspector
General issued a memo documenting three separate investigations into allegations of
diversion, including payments to the Taliban for safe access to specific regions of the
country and interference into procurement and beneficiary selection processes at “major
international NGOs.”66 USAID officials, responding to formal inquiries from SIGAR,
stated twice in 2023 that the agency was “not aware of any diversion of assistance.”67
In the past, to the extent that the U.S. government and its implementing partners have
admitted that there was Taliban interference, it was often framed as “pressure” that partners
had successfully resisted, or as suspicion that other NGOs were complying with Taliban
demands.68 In 2023, a State spokesperson told the press that the WFP had suspended its
distributions in Ghor Province because of “attempted” aid diversion.69
Despite these denials, in a May 2024 audit of U.S. funds benefiting the Taliban, SIGAR found
that U.S. partners had paid at least $10.9 million to the Taliban in taxes, fees, duties, and
utilities. (These are permissible under U.S. law and UN regulations when necessary for the
delivery of aid.) This was likely only a fraction of the true amount, because UN agencies
receiving U.S. funds did not collect data on or provide information about payments made by
the NGOs and other partners they funded. The audit found that implementing partners faced
direct pressure from the Taliban to include them in program design and approval processes;
to allow them to use their vehicles and offices; to hire specific individuals; and to divert food
and other aid to populations chosen by the Taliban.70

AUGUST 2025 | 7

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

AID DIVERSION ENRICHES AND EMPOWERS HOSTILE REGIMES
Hostile regimes are able to divert aid because aid workers are “entirely dependent on
state consent if they are to do their jobs,” according to two veteran Doctors Without
Borders staff with decades of experience negotiating humanitarian access in hostile
regimes. “In hundreds of different, daily ways, humanitarians need the cooperation of
government officials—for customs clearance, tax matters, travel permissions, visas,
work permits, registration, international bank transfers, and so on.”71 Regimes use these
tools to direct aid to their supporters and away from populations they view as enemies.72
Paradoxically, the same aid that feeds hungry people can also fuel a war economy. NGOs
rely on vendors, including transport companies, landlords, and financial institutions that are
often owned by parties to the conflict.73 The longer the war goes on, the longer humanitarian
aid flows, the richer these vendors get. In Yemen, the Middle East Research and Information
Project (MERIP) found that humanitarian assistance “enrich[ed] an entrenched militant elite
who monopolize the distribution of aid and use food and supplies as political capital.”74 The
richer they get, the greater their incentive to spoil peace processes. According to MERIP,
“the distribution of aid removes incentives for peace initiatives and prolongs the very crisis
that the humanitarian organizations seek to alleviate.”75
In hostile contexts, humanitarian assistance often constitutes one of the country’s largest
economic sectors and becomes a key resource over which parties to the conflict compete.76
If it lasts long enough, conflict also devastates the regular economy, engendering more
aid dependence. In the 1970s, according to UN research, Yemen imported only 18 percent
of its cereals. Today, after decades of conflict, it imports 90 percent. Food aid, a shortterm solution provided over the long-term has played a significant role in destroying the
agricultural economy of Yemen and creating dependency.77

THE TALIBAN ARE SKEPTICAL OF AID THEY PERCEIVE AS COUNTER
TO THEIR VALUES, EXPERTS SAY
Afghanistan experts say that, because the Taliban derive legitimacy from protecting their
version of Islamic values, they are antagonistic toward forms of aid that they feel violate
them. This is especially true for anything they see as promoting secular Western culture.78
According to a report by the Afghanistan Analysts Network, education is an especially
contentious topic. The report says that some members of the Taliban viewed NGO efforts
to convince community members to send girls to school as “brainwashing.”79
The Taliban have exerted significant influence over the public education system for
more than a decade. Under the previous government, they had a role in the selection
and supervision of teachers. In 2013, the Taliban succeeded in getting the previous
government’s Ministry of Education to make changes to the national curriculum,
including increasing the amount of class time spent on religion, in exchange for the
Taliban’s agreement to stop attacking schools.80

8 | INTRODUCTION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

Similarly, the Taliban subject women-led NGOs to more scrutiny than their men-led
counterparts, since their leadership challenges the Taliban’s beliefs about women’s role
in society.81 In response to a formal inquiry by SIGAR, a USAID official wrote that the
Taliban have refused to register women-led NGOs, prevented them from opening bank
accounts, refused to authorize women-focused projects, demanded that women on
boards of directors be replaced with men, and threatened to close organizations that
failed to comply with their policies.82 In 2023, even the UN Deputy Secretary General and
the Executive Director of UN Women, both women, were told that they should not be on
public site visits without male chaperones—specifically, a husband, father, or brother.83
An NGO official explained to SIGAR that, because male staff are barred from interacting
with women in Afghanistan, NGOs must deliver aid to men in the hopes that they will
share it with their female relatives.84
According to multiple Afghanistan experts, the Taliban cannot bow to international pressure
regarding the rights of women and girls because these positions have been essential to
the group’s identity since its inception and are a major source of their legitimacy.85 These
policies also reflect the values and practices of many rural Afghan communities.86 One NGO
official told SIGAR that if the Taliban were to compromise their “moral authority” on gender
issues, they would risk opposition from their most important constituency—their fighters—
and could lose them to recruitment by more extreme groups.87
According to a U.S. Institute of Peace report, the healthcare sector is less controversial,
because the Taliban see that healthcare benefits their fighters and their communities. The
more tangible the work of an NGO, the less resistance it tends to face from the Taliban.
The report explained that the Taliban are willing “to accept foreign-funded … goods and
services as long as they are delivered in a suitable low-profile, apolitical fashion, and with
tangible immediate benefits.”88 However, they are skeptical of “soft” programming focused
on subjects like human rights, public awareness, and mental health.89

Top UN officials in Afghanistan Roza Otunbayeva and Daniel Endres at the Herat Regional Hospital visiting
victims of the deadly 6.3 magnitude earthquake that struck western Afghanistan on October 7, 2023. (UN
photo by Sampa Kangwa-Wilkie)

AUGUST 2025 | 9

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

AFGHANISTAN REMAINS ONE OF THE WORLD’S POOREST COUNTRIES
Even though levels of aid to Afghanistan fell precipitously after the Taliban takeover,
until recently, the country was one of the largest aid recipients in the world.90 In
2022, the latest year for which data is available, Afghanistan was the seventh-largest
recipient of overall aid.91 It was also the sixth-largest recipient of aid from the United
States in 2023, falling to number nine in 2024, and, as of July 2024, the second-largest
recipient from the United Kingdom.92 Before the Taliban takeover, donors funded about
75 percent of government spending. When that funding abruptly stopped, the Afghan
banking system nearly shut down, and around 90 percent of health clinics were at risk of
closing.93 In the months following the Taliban takeover, only the continuation of donor
support prevented the total collapse of the healthcare system.94
Today, Afghanistan remains one of the poorest and least developed countries in the
world.95 As of the summer of 2024, the UN reported that 9 out of 10 households struggle
to adequately feed themselves.96 Even before the U.S. cut all aid to the Afghan people
in 2025, aid reductions by a number of other countries were threatening the country’s
fragile “famine equilibrium,” a state of affairs in which most people barely have
enough food to subsist and substantial foreign aid is needed to prevent actual famine.97
According to the UN’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
States’ humanitarian support to Afghanistan has been “instrumental in strengthening
emergency responses during critical moments… while also playing a pivotal role in
averting famine.”98
In April 2025, State Department spokesperson Tammy Bruce confirmed that emergency
food assistance programs in Afghanistan, which had previously received waivers
permitting them to continue operating on the grounds that they were “life-saving,”
had been terminated “to mitigate Taliban interference.” At the same time, the State
Department terminated other awards that provided cash-based assistance “given
concerns about misuse and a lack of appropriate accountability.”99
Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United
Kingdom have also announced plans to reduce foreign assistance. In February 2025, the
UK said it would reduce foreign aid by 50 percent to divert resources to defense, and
France has said it will cut 40 percent of its aid budget. Germany previously announced
its intent to reduce aid by $2 billion due to its contracting economy. In March 2025,
the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), a major international NGO with decades of
experience working in Afghanistan, said, “This is the most challenging situation that
NRC has faced in 22 years” in the country.100
OCHA has reported that, without U.S. funding, only those Afghans with the most
critical needs will receive assistance in 2025. The WFP said on social media that award
terminations “could amount to a death sentence for millions of people facing extreme
hunger and starvation.” OCHA also predicts that if additional funds are not raised, up to
seven million Afghans may lose access to critical healthcare in 2025. OCHA also expects
a significant reduction in primary healthcare coverage, limited response capacity for

10 | INTRODUCTION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

disease outbreaks, limited malnutrition treatment, a reduction in emergency medical
support, and increased morbidity and mortality rates due to insufficient access to lifesaving interventions. The strain on remaining health care facilities, they said, could also
lead to service collapse in areas with high needs.101 Further economic contraction will
hurt women and girls the most, as they often suffer the most from hunger.102
But simply continuing humanitarian aid may not be the answer. A November 2023
independent assessment of the situation in Afghanistan, commissioned by the
UN Security Council, criticized donors’ overreliance on unsustainable short-term
humanitarian aid, and found that there would be “dire consequences for the Afghan
people and the entire region” if donors continued their current approach.103 The UN
report called for donors to increase longer-term development assistance, including
increasing funding for the provision of basic services such as health care and investing
in the country’s long-term economic recovery.104 The report also called for greater
willingness by donors to support the UN’s provision of technical assistance to the
Taliban regime in certain areas—for example, in creating greater transparency around
how the Taliban collects and spends revenue. These pleas have been echoed by experts
at the U.S. Institute of Peace, the United Kingdom’s Independent Commission for Aid
Impact, and the Center for Strategic and International Studies, among others.105

AUGUST 2025 | 11

CHAPTER 2

THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO
DIVERT AID

T

he Taliban use every means at their disposal, including force, to ensure that
aid goes where they want it to go, as opposed to where donors intend. Under
the previous internationally backed government, aid programs were concentrated
primarily in urban government-controlled areas and were politicized as a key element
of counter-insurgency strategy.106 Now, the reverse is happening: rural areas that were
Taliban-controlled under the previous government are accessible, and the Taliban are
pressuring NGOs to concentrate aid disproportionately in these places.107 In the short
term, the Taliban are attempting to address a perceived imbalance by directing aid to
parts of the country that had been neglected and where their supporters live.108 Their
methods include physically interfering in aid delivery, which can be as simple as setting
up a few roadblocks. Local officials interfere to choose which regions, groups, and
families receive aid.109 According to a 2023 report by the U.S. Institute of Peace, the
Taliban “increasingly regard [aid] as just another . . . revenue stream,” one which their
movement will seek to monopolize and centralize control over.110
The Taliban also use their regulatory power to authorize which NGOs may operate, and
under what conditions; they block and redirect aid to ensure that food goes to Pashtun
communities and not to Hazara or Tajik communities; they refuse to allow NGOs to
operate unless they hire Taliban-affiliated businesses, hire Taliban-affiliated individuals,
or partner with Taliban-owned NGOs. NGOs that refuse their demands risk having their
registrations revoked, losing permission to implement their programs and having their

AUGUST 2025 | 13

A Taliban guard stands over
sacks of food aid donated
by the Indian government
in Kabul on May 18, 2025.
(AFP photo by Wakil Kohsar)

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

bank accounts frozen.111 The Taliban use their regulatory power to control program
implementation, and use the negotiations required by this regulatory process as an
opportunity to demand kickbacks and other payments.112 They pressure the UN and
NGOs to fire Hazara employees, issue contracts to Taliban-affiliated companies, partner
with Taliban-affiliated NGOs, and infiltrate aid organizations to facilitate aid diversion
and censor reporting about it.113
The Taliban’s regulatory power is enforced by an extensive security apparatus. They use
their intelligence service to divert humanitarian aid to their own military forces, prevent
NGOs from reporting instances of aid diversion, and detain or beat NGO workers who do
not cooperate.114 In some cases, UN agencies pay the Taliban for security, even though
other UN agencies and experts oppose the practice. More specifically, they pay Badri 313,
a unit of the Interior Ministry, which is led by Sirajuddin Haqqani, who was until recently
sanctioned by the United States and the UN for his involvement in terrorism.115 The FBI
had offered a $10 million reward for information leading to his arrest.116
The Taliban believe that they, like most governments, have the responsibility to direct
where aid goes and hold aid organizations accountable.117 But the Taliban regime is
not like most other governments: it took power by force and it responds to defiance
by Afghans on the front lines of aid delivery with violent and punitive measures.118
According to the Aid Worker Security Database, in 2024 almost 400 aid workers were
killed in Afghanistan, more than 100 were kidnapped, and more than 200 were injured.119
According to the UN’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, of the
127 humanitarian incidents it recorded in January 2025, the Taliban were responsible for
eighty three percent. (OCHA tracks a wide variety of incidents ranging from interference
with staff recruitment to the arrest of and violence against staff.)120
The Taliban appear to be getting better at diverting aid as they consolidate power.121 By
2022, senior World Food Programme officials informed State that interference into aid
delivery had worsened significantly. In April of that year, senior WFP officials described
recent interference as having been “condoned by the central authorities,” as opposed to
earlier interference that had “seemed localized and not endorsed by officials in Kabul.”122
The following August, a senior UN humanitarian official told State that “Taliban
interference into relief operations had steadily increased in recent months.”123
The Taliban and individuals associated with them may also use more sophisticated
methods for profiting from humanitarian aid, such as manipulating the value of
Afghanistan’s currency when aid funding, in the form of U.S. dollars, passes through
the central bank (see Chapter 3).124 Finally, the very presence of foreign aid for social
services such as health care enables the Taliban to shift more of their budget to the
security sector.125

14 | THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO DIVERT AID

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

THE TALIBAN PROFIT FROM UN CORRUPTION, ACCORDING TO
INTERVIEWEES
In the process of conducting interviews for this report, SIGAR repeatedly encountered
allegations that UN officials demand bribes in order to issue contracts to companies
and NGOs.126 Due to a lack of access since the Taliban takeover, SIGAR could not
confirm these allegations, but they fit the picture of a “pay to play” culture outlined in a
February 2023 report by a nonprofit providing independent humanitarian analysis, which
found that the Afghan NGOs they surveyed said that “requests for bribes or a percentage
of a contract to secure funding” were one of their biggest challenges.127
Ten individuals, who SIGAR interviewed independently, explained how senior UN staff
in Afghanistan, including expatriates, conspired to personally profit from the influx of
aid. These interviewees did not know each other, held a variety of roles, and offered very
different perspectives. Reflecting the threat they live under, nearly everyone interviewed
about this topic asked to remain anonymous. They included one current and one former
UN official, a former senior Afghan government official, a businessman, an Afghan civil
society activist, and staff of companies and NGOs with UN contracts.128 For example, an
NGO director said, “For 70 percent of [UN] contracts, you have to pay some money.”129
Most of the allegations SIGAR heard involved employees of the WFP, which has been
the largest single recipient of both U.S. and overall aid to Afghanistan since the Taliban
takeover. (WFP has received about a third of all U.S. aid to Afghanistan since the Taliban
takeover.)130 However, SIGAR heard similar allegations about staff working for eight
other UN agencies.131
Interviewees told SIGAR that UN officials demand bribes from companies and
NGOs seeking contracts from their agencies. They said that these are calculated as a
percentage of the contract at stake, with estimates varying between 5 and 50 percent.132
A former senior Afghan government official explained that the size of the contract
determines whether senior UN staff get involved; for smaller contracts, more junior UN
staff collect bribes.133
According to the same former official, UN staff handpick winning contractors before
the official bidding process begins.134 An NGO director told SIGAR that, after attending
a pre-bidding meeting organized by a UN agency, UN staff demanded bribes. When
his organization refused to pay, the staff disqualified the company during the bidding
process. He described watching in despair as his competitors, who he says are paying
bribes, have taken more and more market share from his NGO.135 He clarified that when
a company or NGO refuses to pay kickbacks to UN staff, UN agencies refuse to pay
them for their work. When this creates cash flow problems and impedes their ability to
perform, they are fired for “non-performance.” He explained further that UN officials rig
bids in favor of specific vendors by notifying them in advance of their competitors about
new procurement announcements, giving them inside information about the secret
criteria against which bids will be evaluated, and making requirements intentionally
vague so they can arbitrarily select the firms paying kickbacks.136

AUGUST 2025 | 15

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

UN staff also allegedly condition their award decisions on demands that contractors
hire family members as subcontractors and their preferred individuals as staff.137 Several
interviewees told SIGAR that UN staff steer business to local NGOs in which they have
ownership stakes.138 To make contracting decisions, UN agencies rely on selection
committees comprising staffers from a number of different departments, including
finance, procurement, and program. SIGAR’s sources said that these staff collude to
extract bribes from the companies bidding.139
An NGO director suspected that financial discrepancies were linked to WFP’s collusion
with the contractor and the Taliban, while a businessman told SIGAR that one UN
agency was working with the Taliban to extort bribes from contractors.140 The NGO
director said that this creates a relationship between UN officials, Taliban officials, and
staff of the contractor that he described as “a triangle.”141
An NGO official explained to SIGAR “the Taliban, particularly the Haqqanis, . . . use
all the levers of state bureaucracy to prevent a company . . . [from operating] in the
country” if they refuse to add a Taliban vice president or other shareholder with major
decision-making authority. According to the official, these individuals are often the
immediate relatives of Taliban officials and enjoy a share in the company’s profits
without having to make any investment into the company.142 He told SIGAR that a friend
who runs a company providing fuel to the UN had been forced to accept a relative of
Interior Minister Sirajuddin Haqqani as a partner “even though he hadn’t invested a
penny.”143 A civil society activist told SIGAR that a company with major UN contracts
is owned by a top Taliban leader, and that the company bribed WFP staff to win the
contract. Major UN contractors provide “direct support to the Taliban in terms of cash,
food, and even logistical support,” he added.144 A WFP third-party monitoring official
also told SIGAR that the company has Taliban ties and said they “pay the Taliban for
protection at every stage of implementation.”145

In Iraq, the UN Development Programme Was Involved in a Kickback Scheme
In January 2024, the Guardian reported on a kickback scheme by staff of the
UN Development Programme (UNDP) working in Iraq on the Funding Facility for
Stabilization program, to which the United States was the largest donor at the time.146
Three employees and four contractors accused UNDP staff of demanding bribes of
up to 15 percent of the contract value in exchange for awarding the contracts. The
Guardian’s sources described “a perverse incentive structure in which UN employees
who wanted to ‘keep their cushy salaries’ colluded with [Iraqi] government employees
to identify new projects, with progress reports embellishing results to justify more
funding.”147 UNDP employees described a “culture of fear and impunity” in which UNDP
managers, who had developed close relationships with their government counterparts,
used those relationships to shield themselves from accountability and to retaliate
against staff who spoke out.148

16 | THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO DIVERT AID

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

The same civil society activist also told SIGAR that the Taliban increase their own power
by using their influence over UN contractors to direct funding to their supporters. “The
Taliban’s strategy involves using [UN] agencies as instruments of power, directing aid in
ways that consolidate their control while depriving vulnerable communities of essential
support,” the activist said.149 This allegation is consistent with a U.S. Institute of Peace
report that found that “the Taliban have effectively infiltrated and influenced most
UN-managed assistance programming.”150 A former senior Afghan government official
expressed similar concerns about “the unbalanced distribution of aid by the UN,” in which
“aid mostly goes to areas deemed friendly to those in power” and not to the neediest
Tajik and Hazara populations in the northern and central parts of the country.151 He also
told SIGAR that the UN favors “Taliban-friendly logistics companies.”152 A number of
companies and NGOs who do business with the UN allegedly have Taliban ties.153
The large size of WFP contracts, sometimes hundreds of millions of dollars, enables
the companies that win them to grow in size, status, and influence. For example, a civil
society activist told SIGAR that two companies with large WFP contracts also have
contracts to provide food to the Taliban military. He alleged that some WFP contractors
are involved in drug and weapons smuggling and funding terrorism.154

The UN Pays the Haqqani Network for Security
UN agencies pay the Taliban to provide security for their offices and armed escorts for
their convoys as they move around the country—a practice the UN has defended as
necessary to protect its employees.155 Under the previous government, the UN paid the
government for armed escorts, which it used widely.156 Likewise, the Taliban provided
armed escorts for aid convoys in the parts of the country it controlled, but they generally
did so for free—at a time when an actual war was going on.157 Three people, including a
UN official, told SIGAR that the Badri 313 Battalion, an elite military unit under the control
of the Haqqani Network, provides protection to multiple UN bases, including in Kabul.158
Paying the Taliban for security is controversial among UN agencies and the broader aid
community.159 UN guidelines permit the use of armed escorts, but only as a last resort.160
Paying armed organizations for security can have major costs. In Sudan, the UN paid
the Rapid Support Forces (RSF) to secure humanitarian convoys. The RSF, a militia that
grew out of conflict in the Darfur region in the 2000s, went on to support multiple coups
and launch attacks against the government. The UN now needs to be protected from the
very group they used to pay to protect them.161
According to SIGAR’s sources, certain UN agencies, such as WFP, were quick to agree
to the Taliban’s demands that they pay them for armed escorts, while others, including
the UN’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, were opposed.162 One
NGO official criticized the UN payments as “formalized bribery,” and alleged that the UN
put pressure on NGOs to follow suit.163 An implementing partner admitted the Taliban
had pressured her organization to pay them for security, but said they had been able to
decline.164 A different NGO official told SIGAR that a third NGO had been removed from
their NGO coalition for paying the Taliban for security, in violation of the donor’s policy.165

AUGUST 2025 | 17

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

Other criticism was more nuanced. Refugees International has called for armed escorts
to be used only when necessary for security and phased out elsewhere.166 A former
UN official told SIGAR that she took a similar position. “In areas with known ISIS-K
presence, it made sense, but in other areas, once the fighting stopped there was no
justification for an armed escort,” she said.167
Research by the International Committee of the Red Cross found that the aid sector’s
overreliance on armed escorts in Afghanistan is not unusual; in dangerous places it has
“become the rule,” but the benefits of using such security services do not necessarily
outweigh risks.168 A 2022 review of the UN’s response to the crisis in Yemen criticized an
overreliance on armed escorts in the country, including those manned by soldiers of the
internationally-recognized Southern Transitional Council government that controls part
of the country. It characterized UN payments for this service as “in effect a contribution
to the [government’s] fighting forces.”169

THE TALIBAN USE THEIR INTELLIGENCE SERVICE TO DIVERT AID,
SOMETIMES BY FORCE
The Taliban’s General Directorate of Intelligence (GDI) appears to be the enforcement arm
of its diversionary practices, ensuring that implementers deliver aid to where they are told
and preventing them from reporting incidents of diversion. Several interviewees told SIGAR
they had experienced or knew of varying levels of interference from the GDI.170 A 2023 UN
report found that the GDI had been heavy handed in its dealings with NGOs, saying that
GDI officials had searched the offices of many of them and detained their staff.171
Several interviewees with first-hand experience in Afghanistan told SIGAR that aid
was going to Taliban military bases and soldiers in several provinces.172 An Afghan
civil society activist said that the Taliban pressures NGOs to provide food and cash to
five large military bases in Daykundi Province. Meanwhile, needy families belonging
to populations the Taliban consider enemies, like the Hazara, receive very little food,
and much of what they get is spoiled.173 An Afghan NGO official told SIGAR that he was
aware of food being diverted to Taliban religious schools and military camps where
al-Qaeda and other foreigners were being trained.174 He also said that he was on the run
from the Taliban for documenting this diversion of food aid.
An Afghan NGO official responsible for distributing WFP food, who agreed to be
interviewed at great personal risk, described multiple situations where he was
compelled to divert food to Taliban soldiers, Taliban members, and their families.175
He said that district-level intelligence officials, as well as civilian officials up to the
provincial level, were involved in diversion.176 He told SIGAR he had observed armed
and uniformed Taliban soldiers taking food from WFP warehouses in the presence of
Taliban intelligence officials, and he believed that the WFP head for that province was
fully aware of this.177 Another former NGO official told SIGAR he had also seen armed
Taliban at WFP warehouses.178

18 | THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO DIVERT AID

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

A person working in third-party monitoring for the WFP in a different part of
Afghanistan told SIGAR that the Taliban’s intelligence service made it impossible for him
to do his job: any reports of fraud or diversion were shared with the Taliban, who would
retaliate by beating his team members. He said that this forced him and his colleagues
to censor themselves.179 A civil society activist also believed that WFP employees were
in direct contact with the GDI, and that as a result, third-party monitors could not
accurately report on any wrongdoing “because their lives would be in danger.”180 One
NGO director who had been arrested by the GDI several times told SIGAR he believed
that all NGOs are subject to government surveillance.181
In addition to diverting aid and intimidating aid distribution workers, the GDI and other
Taliban security personnel appear to be using aid distribution, including access to
medical care, to find and retaliate against former Afghan National Defense and Security
Force personnel who served under the internationally supported government. A civil
society activist told SIGAR that the Taliban want NGO beneficiary lists so they can
identify members of the former government.182 Another NGO official said that although
his NGO did not want to provide the Taliban with information, the Taliban “set up a table
outside one of our distribution points and [took] names of beneficiaries.”183

Hostile Regimes Often Interfere in Aid Delivery
The Taliban are not unique in using these tactics; interference into aid delivery by
intelligence and security forces is also a serious problem in other countries. Under the
Bashar al-Assad Syrian government, donors were sometimes forced to implement their
programs through a government-affiliated entity, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. Several
high-level UN officials told the Center for Strategic and International Studies that this
was the first time they had seen the UN allow a single government-affiliated agency to
deliver aid.184 Of the NGOs in Syria surveyed during the Assad regime by People Demand
Change, a Middle-East-focused development firm, 85 percent reported experiencing
interference by security forces. One said, “[Syrian] intelligence own the humanitarian aid
system. They do not need to steal from it.”185
Interference by government forces is also a problem in Sudan, where the body that
regulates aid work, the Humanitarian Aid Commission, is closely associated with
military intelligence. Intelligence officers are stationed inside commission offices to
control aid delivery. 186

AID DIVERSION ALSO TAKES THE FORM OF INTERFERENCE WITH
THE SELECTION OF NGO PARTNERS, VENDORS, AND STAFF
One of the most effective tools any nation receiving foreign aid has for interference in
NGO operations is its regulatory capacity. Donors typically have their own foreign policy
goals attached to the funding they provide; recipients want the funding, but not what
they perceive as foreign interference.187

AUGUST 2025 | 19

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

In Afghanistan, aid delivery is subject to a 2022 Taliban law that, according to the
Afghanistan Analysts Network, marked “the start of a more aggressive regulatory stance
towards aid work.”188 Contentious negotiations over the law’s implementation, led by the UN
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in September of that year, ultimately convinced
the Taliban to agree to significant changes, including the removal of a requirement that
NGOs share the names of beneficiaries with the Taliban, which relief workers found
particularly problematic.189 (WFP regulations, for example, require that beneficiary
information remain confidential.190) Even so, the law requires NGOs to share their survey
and assessment data with the Taliban.191 Some interviewees said that the Taliban still have
some access to the names of aid beneficiaries, which enables them to retaliate against
people they consider enemies, such as employees of the previous Afghan government.192
Despite State Department assurances to SIGAR that it “is not aware of funding going to
implementing partners or sub-awardees with ties/connections to the Taliban,” there is
evidence that the Taliban regularly directs funding to its preferred NGOs.193 According
to the U.S. Institute of Peace, “The Taliban have encouraged establishment of friendly
or even directly sponsored [civil society organizations] and NGOs. One NGO association
reported that more than 100 new organizations had applied for membership in the first
quarter of 2022 alone.”194 Another NGO official said there is a running joke that there are
now three categories of NGOs: “international NGOs, national NGOs, and Taliban NGOs.”195
A State Department official, in response to a formal inquiry, told SIGAR that the Taliban
revoked the registration of four Tajik-run NGOs that were implementing UNICEF’s
Health Emergency Response Program in late 2022. Being deregistered forced them
to stop their work, since UNICEF requires its partners to be legally registered in the
countries where they operate.196 An NGO official told SIGAR that this was because
they were all run by Tajiks.197 A civil society activist told SIGAR that WFP selects
companies and organizations because they “are affiliated with the Taliban or have
close relationships with the Taliban.” Vendors owned by Taliban leaders or with ties to
the Taliban give NGOs the ability to “do their work without any challenges… [and to]
navigate the Taliban court system,” he said.198
Several interviewees told SIGAR that the Taliban make it extremely difficult to import
medicine, either confiscating it outright or delaying its release until it has expired.
Then, the interviewees said, they force NGOs to purchase medicine from their preferred
providers, taking a cut for themselves.199

Complicated Negotiations over Memorandums of Understanding Can
Enable Diversion
One major method the Taliban use to prevent UN agencies from partnering with NGOs
they find unacceptable is refusing to sign the memoranda of understanding (MOU). The
law regulating the operations of NGOs requires each NGO to register for a license with
the national Ministry of Economy and to sign an MOU with the Taliban regime. The
law does not specify what sort of documentation must be submitted or who must sign
off (beyond the names of institutions), but failing to get an MOU makes it illegal for

20 | THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO DIVERT AID

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

an NGO to operate.200 The Taliban exploit this legal ambiguity.
Many interviewees described the process of getting an MOU
as arduous, unpredictable—and completely unavoidable.201
One MOU SIGAR reviewed included vague language requiring
the organization to follow “Islamic views, Islamic values, good
traditions, and cultural values,” without specifying what this
meant in practice.202
In April 2025, SIGAR issued an audit of the MOUs that State
Department implementing partners had signed with the Taliban.
SIGAR found that “the Taliban’s requirement to complete MOUs
gives the Taliban a powerful means of influencing U.S.-funded
activities.” The audit determined that “even though State is
not specifically required to review and approve MOUs, the
department should broadly understand its duty to be aware of
implementing partner activities, including a responsibility to be
cognizant of how these MOUs are negotiated and enforced.” It
found that this was necessary in order to ensure compliance with
requirements in the Foreign Affairs Manual, Federal Assistance
Directive, and Code of Federal Regulations that State be aware of
the activities of its implementing partners.203
The extent of Taliban interference appears to vary based on the
sector and the ministry involved. One major NGO signed MOUs
with two different ministries for the same project. One required
“collaboration” with the ministry on hiring, while the other stated
the NGO was solely responsible for hiring its staff.204
After the MOU is signed, NGOs must get additional approvals
from provincial- and district-level officials—and at each level,
negotiations start fresh, regardless of what was approved
earlier.205 Each level of interaction introduces opportunities for
interference, diversion, and bribery.206 A single bad meeting with a
Taliban official can destroy months of consensus built with other
officials. In September 2023, a year after the new NGO regulatory
law was announced, the Ministry of Economy issued a letter to
provincial directorates of economy with official guidance on
the responsibilities of the directorates and NGOs. NGOs raised
concern about new requirements, including Taliban ownership
of NGO property, Taliban involvement in NGO procurement and
recruitment, and Taliban approval of NGO workshops, seminars,
and gatherings.207 It appears that the NGOs’ concerns were
never addressed at the national level, although in early 2024, one
education NGO was banned by the Taliban for refusing to turn
over its assets and programming to Taliban control.208

FIGURE 1

HOW TO IMPLEMENT A PROJECT UNDER
THE TALIBAN
NGO LICENSED BY MINISTRY OF ECONOMY
NGOs are required to register with the
Ministry of Economy to obtain a license
to operate.
THE MINISTRY INTRODUCES NGO TO RLM
The Ministry of Economy introduces the
NGO to the relevant line ministries (RLM)
based on the nature of the project.
NGO & RLM NEGOTIATE TERMS OF MOU
The NGO then negotiates terms of a
memorandum of understanding (MOU)
with the RLM. The MOU is then signed.
NGO NEGOTIATES WITH PROVINCIAL GOVT
The provincial government reviews the
MOU and negotiates further operational
details with the NGO.
NGO NEGOTIATES WITH LOCAL AUTHORITY
After lengthy negotiations with national
and provincial authorities, the NGO can
now negotiate with local authorities.
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION BEGINS
After several rounds of negotiations and
approval that typically lasts months, the
project implementation can begin.
Source: NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 10, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview March 30, 2023; implementing
partner, SIGAR interview, April 27, 2023; former NGO
Official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, August 25, 2023; NGO director, SIGAR interview,
October 2, 2023; Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, “The
procedure for coordinating the activities and regulating the
domestic and foreign institutions and NGOs;” Afghanistan
Affairs Unit, “Notes from the Field October 11, 2022,”
October 22, 2022; Afghanistan Affairs Unit, “Notes from the
Field October 31, 2022,” November 1, 2022.

AUGUST 2025 | 21

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

Operating without an MOU is not a realistic long-term option. One NGO official told SIGAR
that his organization had attempted to work without an MOU, but Taliban intelligence
officers had arrested him and his staff multiple times for doing so.209 In early October 2022,
the Taliban Ministry of Economy threatened to suspend the humanitarian activities of one
of USAID’s partner organizations because it was operating without a signed MOU. At that
point, a different USAID partner had been unable to implement its aid program for three
months because it was waiting for the Ministry of Public Health to sign its MOU.210 Later
that month, the Taliban Ministry of Public Health sent a letter to the provincial public
health directorates ordering the suspension any NGO health projects that lacked an MOU,
causing disruption to several healthcare NGOs.211 The Taliban also force NGOs to work
with Taliban-affiliated or Taliban-owned NGOs, vendors, and contractors. For example,
one NGO official told SIGAR that the Ministry of Public Health would approve their
project only if they subcontracted the work to the ministry’s preferred NGO.212 A UNICEF
official told SIGAR that companies get contracts to support aid programs because of their
relationships with Taliban provincial or district governors, whose permissions are needed
to implement programs. He cited examples of contracts for textbook procurement being
directed by local officials to Taliban-affiliated companies.213 Similarly, five NGO officials
have told SIGAR that the Taliban forces them to rent cars and houses from Taliban
officials directly or to use Taliban-affiliated vendors.214

The Taliban Force NGOs to Hire Their Supporters, Who Facilitate Aid
Diversion from Within
Because NGOs must be legally registered, governments can interfere in their staffing.215
Ultimately, a regime can control aid delivery by requiring NGOs to hire a significant number
of government supporters and sympathizers. When enough employees are replaced, Taliban
hiring interference effectively transforms an NGO into a Taliban organization.
Taliban interference into NGO hiring is pervasive.216 In August 2023, SIGAR surveyed
seven NGOs in different sectors and regions about hiring interference. Only one, in
Herat, reported that they had not experienced this. An NGO worker in Ghor Province
estimated that at least 20 percent of the employees of international NGOs were affiliated
with the Taliban.217 Another former NGO official told SIGAR that the Taliban’s provincial
governor identified people for the organization to hire.218
Another NGO official said her organization had received multiple letters from the
Taliban ordering them to give Taliban soldiers priority in hiring.219 SIGAR obtained two
MOUs between NGOs and the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs that include language
requiring “collaboration” with a Taliban representative when hiring staff.220 However,
experiences vary: An NGO worker in Balkh Province said the Taliban intervened
“unofficially and indirectly,” while a worker in Ghor Province described a system of
interference run by provincial authorities.221 SIGAR has also seen MOUs requiring
Taliban involvement in hiring, as well as several State Department cables raising alarms
about the extent of Taliban interference in hiring.222

22 | THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO DIVERT AID

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

In some cases, the Taliban require an NGO to put a person on their payroll to collect a
salary without ever showing up to work. One former NGO official told SIGAR that “many
NGOs have had to hire one or two Taliban members. They aren’t official staff, and we
never see them at the office…They were just introduced by key leaders of the Taliban,
and we were told they would be given a salary from our NGO now.”223 Others told SIGAR
that hiring members of the Taliban can be advantageous to their NGOs because having
a Taliban-affiliated person on staff makes negotiations with the regime easier (a general
rule that also applied under the previous government).224
Some of these Taliban-affiliated NGO staffers are there to monitor and direct an
organization’s work from the inside. An NGO official told SIGAR: “We are required
to hire Taliban officials and then they influence our work.”225 In December 2023, the
Taliban’s General Directorate of Intelligence announced that NGOs may only hire
candidates with a GDI approval letter.226 By February 2024, some NGOs reported
increasing pressure from provincial and district level Taliban officials to turn over lists
of their employees’ names and other personal information. One UN agency told State
that such requests were not new, but that GDI involvement was.227
Should an NGO push back on hiring interference, the Taliban can simply refuse to
sign their MOU, effectively shutting them down. One NGO official told SIGAR about a
nutrition project that was given a list of people the Taliban wanted them to hire. When
the NGO told the Taliban that they would only hire employees who were professionally
qualified, months of negotiation ensued without any agreement. In the end, the project
was never implemented, and the funds were returned to the donor.228 A medical doctor
and NGO program director told SIGAR that an international NGO allowed the Taliban
to select staff on mobile health teams in Taliban-controlled areas, because resisting this
interference would result in dire consequences. The doctor spoke from experience: In
Taliban-controlled Kunduz before the collapse, the Taliban closed his office, detained his
staff, and threatened violence when he opposed similar hiring interference.229
Several sources told SIGAR that hiring interference appears to be biased towards
Pashtuns. They said that ethnic discrimination that existed during the previous
government has worsened under the Taliban, with interviewees observing that nonPashtuns have been systematically excluded from aid sector jobs.230 An NGO official said
that a Taliban ministry refused to do business with one of her organization’s non-Pashto
speaking staff, demanding that they send someone who spoke Pashto. Her organization
has been forced to replace some of their minority staff with Pashtuns.231
One strategy that USAID partners have used to avoid awarding contracts to Taliban-affiliated
NGOs has been to restrict bidding to NGOs that were established under the previous
Afghan government.232 But some of those NGOs have since been forced to bring in Taliban
ownership. Two people told SIGAR that the Taliban force NGOs to add individuals they
identify as senior officers or part owners of their organizations in exchange for permission
to continue operating.233 These individuals then receive a percentage of the NGOs’ profits.234
According to an NGO official, the Taliban “want to be partners with you.”235 In addition, a

AUGUST 2025 | 23

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

former senior government official told SIGAR that Taliban officials require NGOs to allow
them to identify which companies they hired as subcontractors, so they can profit by
directing work to companies they have ownership stakes in.236

THE TALIBAN DIVERT AID BY TAXING AND EXTORTING NGOS
Like any other government, the Taliban impose taxes on the resources coming into the
country, including foreign assistance. The U.S. Treasury Department’s General License 20,
issued in February 2022, states that “the payment of taxes, fees, or import duties, or
the purchase or receipt of permits, licenses, or public utility services” to the Taliban is
permissible under U.S. law.237 Furthermore, in December 2022, Under Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin Griffiths stated that,
although many members of the Taliban are under UN sanctions prohibiting them from
engaging in any banking transactions, UN Resolution 2615 allows payments to the various
government ministries under the control of those individuals when necessary for the
delivery of humanitarian aid and basic services.238 These transactions include paying
withholding taxes on income, sales and property taxes, fees for visas and work permits,
vehicle registration duties, public utility payments, and customs payments on imported
goods. As of December 2022, sanctioned individuals led the ministries of finance, economy,
interior, water and electricity, refugees and repatriation, transport and civil aviation, and
agriculture, irrigation, and livestock—all of which have received tax payments.239
It is difficult to calculate how much U.S. funding has reached the Taliban this way. In
the spring of 2023, SIGAR sent a questionnaire to all 144 implementing partners who
had worked on U.S.-funded foreign assistance since August 2021, asking about their
experiences with Taliban taxation and other payments. A total of 65 responded.240 Of
these, 38 reported paying taxes, fees, customs duties, or public utilities to the Taliban
controlled government. (These are permissible under U.S. law and UN regulations
when necessary for the delivery of aid.)241 The resulting audit on U.S. funds benefitting
the Taliban determined that since August 2021, U.S.-funded projects paid at least
$10.9 million to the Taliban regime.242 The audit could not examine U.S. funding that
is funneled through UN agencies, because UN agencies do not collect such data from
their implementing partners and, therefore, it was limited to implementing partners who
responded to a voluntary questionnaire. As the report said, the $10.9 million figure was
probably a gross undercount.243
The Taliban appear to be selective about how they are applying tax laws carried over
from the previous government. One NGO director told SIGAR how this “cherry picking”
had impacted his organization: The Taliban began an extensive audit of NGOs based on
the previous government’s laws—but also informed him that his organization had not
paid taxes on transportation. When the NGO director told the Taliban that transportation
was not taxable under the previous government, “they said, ‘The Republic is gone.’…but
they are using Republic law to justify the audit they are doing.”244

24 | THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO DIVERT AID

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

The pressure to pay off the Taliban is unrelenting. One NGO official described it as “like
going down a staircase, and every single step, there’s a tax.” One implementing partner
director estimated that after all the layers of taxes, fees, bribery, and extortion, “maybe
around 30 to 40 percent” of donor funds actually reached the population.245
According to the U.S. Institute of Peace, “the Taliban appear to view the UN system as
yet another revenue stream, one their movement will seek to monopolize.”246 Many NGO
officials have reported that they are forced to make payments to the Taliban. There appears
to be little structure to these payments, and it is unclear whether the money paid goes to
the Taliban as a government, or into the pockets of individual officials. As one NGO official
said: The [aid money] coming into Afghanistan is directly supporting the Taliban and
everyone knows this, but no one wants to talk about it. Where it goes after it’s in the bank is
not always clear. But all money is either directly or indirectly supporting the Taliban.247
An implementing partner director, who raised the issue with his contacts at multiple
UN agencies that provided his funding, said they denied that UN-funded projects
were making payments to Taliban ministries and did nothing to help him address this
dilemma.248 When he asked another NGO owner how they could afford to pay off the
Taliban, he was told that the UN had increased the budget line accordingly. He told
SIGAR that he was unwilling to engage with the Taliban himself and told the UN agency
that they could either negotiate for the necessary approvals from the Taliban on his
behalf, or he would implement his project without legal approval.249
Informal and extortionary payments imposed on NGOs are common in hostile or
otherwise unstable countries. NGOs working in al-Shabaab-controlled territory in
Somalia have reported that the going rate is 30 percent of project costs, but the amount
is sometimes negotiable.250 According to a 2021 report by the Danish Institute for
International Studies, taxes imposed at checkpoints in South Sudan deliberately target
NGOs transporting humanitarian assistance and are one reason that the country has
some of the the highest costs in the world for aid delivery—comparable to Afghanistan.
These “taxes” may be more accurately described as shakedowns by armed actors.251

THE TALIBAN USE DIVERTED AID TO REWARD THEIR SUPPORTERS
A regime may subject an oppressed minority to starvation by blocking deliveries to
their area. Tension between humanitarians and regimes over beneficiary selection
is unavoidable due to stark differences in who they want to serve, one former UN
official told SIGAR:
Famine is the physical manifestation of social and political exclusion.… Humanitarians
prioritize children, then female-headed households, then poor families, then the
middle class, then traditional authorities and local officials, and finally the military.
But parties to the conflict prioritize their militaries, then traditional authorities
and local officials, then the middle class, then poor families, then female-headed
households, and finally children.252

AUGUST 2025 | 25

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

Many current and former NGO workers told SIGAR that the Taliban are doing exactly
what the official described: prioritizing their members, supporters, and the widows
and orphans of their fighters over others, regardless of need.253 In the short term, this
may help the Taliban keep the loyalty of its supporters; in the long term, it may be
destabilizing, warned an NGO official with decades of experience in the country. “The
people that you are diverting from will eventually [rise up against] you,” the official
said, adding that the Taliban “have to be careful how long they [deprive] certain
groups” of aid.254
According to the Red Cross Code of Conduct, which hundreds of humanitarian
organizations have signed, humanitarian aid should be distributed in the most neutral
way possible, prioritizing the most vulnerable.255 The World Food Programme, which
has received more U.S. funding than any other organization working in Afghanistan
since August 2021, prohibits its partners from participating in discrimination.256 But the
Taliban, like similar regimes, compels aid organizations to direct assistance to regions
where their supporters live—rural areas populated mostly by ethnic Pashtuns—and
away from populations they consider enemies.257
The central provinces of Afghanistan have historically faced high rates of malnutrition,
with the smallest arable land area of any region, poor soil conditions, and a heavy
reliance on subsistence farming.258 But one NGO official described a meeting he
attended where another NGO presented nutritional data indicating that Kandahar
Province, in the south, and Paktika Province, in the southeast, were underserved,
contrary to his experience and knowledge of Afghanistan. The official believed this
was an attempt to redirect aid to the Taliban’s mostly Pashtun strongholds in the
south and southeast, but “nobody questioned this out loud…because members of the
Taliban ministry were there.”259 He told SIGAR about another project that had received
donor funds to operate in Panjshir and Takhar, both Tajik majority provinces in the
north, but the Ministry of Public Health refused to allow them to work in those areas,
insisting there was no need.260
Many sources have reported widespread discrimination against the Hazaras, an ethnic
and religious minority who have been persecuted throughout Afghan history.261 Several
interviewees described ethnic discrimination as systemic within the WFP, noting that
most WFP staff are Pashtuns.262 The chairman of the World Hazara Council told SIGAR
that he knew Hazara WFP staff who were fired after the Taliban takeover and replaced
with Pashtuns.263
He also told SIGAR that, in Kabul, a city that is a patchwork of ethnic neighborhoods,
very little aid went to Hazara families.264 Another interviewee told SIGAR that Khair
Khana, a Tajik neighborhood in the north of the city, received none.265 At the same time,
neighborhoods that supported the Taliban received so many aid packages they were
selling the extras for profit.266 Several interviewees told SIGAR about distributions
of spoiled or rotten food to minority populations, both in Kabul and throughout

26 | THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO DIVERT AID

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

Afghanistan.267 One interviewee described wheat flour distributed to Hazara areas as
“full of worms and other insects…not even suitable for animal fodder.”268
The president of the Bamyan Foundation, a Washington-based nonprofit, told SIGAR
that sometimes when food aid was delivered to Hazara areas, the Taliban have
arranged for Pashtuns to travel there to collect the aid instead.269 This was not limited
to WFP; the Foundation published a report claiming that Afghan Red Crescent Society
aid distribution in Daykundi (which is majority Hazara) went primarily to Taliban
officials living in Nili, the provincial capital, and to Pashtun families who had travelled
to Nili from other provinces.270 The report identifies several structural reasons that
exacerbate discrimination in aid delivery, including the absence of International
Committee of the Red Cross and WFP regional offices in Bamyan and Daykundi
Provinces, as well as Taliban control of the Afghan Red Crescent Society, which
implements the International Red Cross’ programs.271
When done according to a principled approach, aid distribution typically considers
factors such as a household’s income, wealth, and number of dependents and
directs resources to those with the greatest need. 272 But several humanitarian
workers told SIGAR that Taliban officials require NGOs to put the officials’ family
members on beneficiary lists regardless of need (a practice that also occurred
under the previous internationally supported government). 273 One NGO official said
that his brother, who works with the WFP, was forced to give Taliban members
from outside the area preauthorized beneficiary cards that they used to collect
aid. He also said that the Taliban governor of Kandahar Province had demanded
thousands of WFP beneficiary cards. 274 An NGO director told SIGAR about a cash
aid program meant to support widows—but 50 of the “widows” who collected aid
were Taliban men. 275
Some aid workers expressed mixed feelings about interference in beneficiary
selection. One NGO official described aid diversion as “part of the economic
landscape,” and said that it would be “unusual” if aid was not diverted.276 Another
interviewee noted that diverted aid can go in different directions, some worse than
others. “If it’s going to the children of Taliban families? If so, is it bad?” the interviewee
asked. “If they are stealing fuel to sell on the black market to make themselves rich—
there’s a big difference.”277
Sometimes, Taliban interference with aid distribution looks more like legitimate
governance. Reflecting their distaste for aid dependence, in the first several months
after their takeover, the Taliban announced a food-for-work scheme that provided
wheat to men in exchange for manual labor on irrigation projects.278 While food-forwork programs are common aid projects, the Taliban program prohibits women from
participating. A Kabul widow described her resulting situation as “desperate.”279 One
interviewee told SIGAR that negotiations about work requirements for WFP’s food
distribution in the Kabul area took a month and a half, during which operations were

AUGUST 2025 | 27

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

suspended. WFP ultimately agreed to conditional, food-for-work for 30 percent of
the beneficiaries.280
In some communities, local authorities collect food packages distributed
according to a needs assessment and redistributed them as they see fit. Although
this qualifies as aid diversion by Western definitions, it reflects a social norm in
Afghanistan in which windfalls are shared with the community. 281 Because extreme
poverty is so widespread throughout the country, even if Taliban officials or local
elders overrule a needs-based assessment, it is likely that at least some aid is
getting to people who need it. 282 One implementing partner staffer told SIGAR,
“When the Taliban tell us to give aid to people…they usually need it, because
90 percent of the country is suffering.” 283

AID ENABLES THE TALIBAN TO CUT SPENDING ON SOCIAL SERVICES
Information about how much revenue the Taliban raise and how they spend it
is patchy and unreliable.284 With the exception of a short-term budget released
shortly after they took over, the Taliban Ministry of Finance has not publicized any
information about expenditures.285 The regime produced an approved budget for fiscal
year 2022, but outside of a few high-level figures, it has not been made public.286 Not
only has the Taliban not made its 2024 budget public, but it is being kept secret even
within the regime.287
However, some information is available from the World Bank, which has access
to the Afghanistan Financial Management Information System, maintained by the
Ministry of Finance.288 The Taliban appear to be heavily prioritizing funding for
the security sector. According to a 2022 analysis by the World Bank, the Taliban’s
Ministries of Defense and Interior and the General Directorate of Intelligence
together accounted for over 60 percent of the government’s total operating
expenditures. 289 This emphasis on security sector spending correlated with an
81 percent decrease in spending on social services.290 The Ministry of Public Health
suffered the most drastic cuts. In 2019, the Afghan government spent about 20 billion
afghanis on the Ministry of Public Health; in 2022, the Taliban spent 2 billion. 291
According to the World Bank, in 2023 the Taliban spent only 2 percent of their
budget on the health sector.292 As of late 2023, civil servants were reportedly getting
paid regularly, but the Taliban have lowered their salaries.293 The Taliban assumed
responsibility for paying public school teachers from donors, but according to a
donor official, have reduced their salaries by 30 to 40 percent. 294

28 | THE TALIBAN USE A VARIETY OF METHODS TO DIVERT AID

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

Aid Allows Estranged Regimes to Shift Spending from Social Services
to Repression
Foreign aid enables recipient governments to decrease their spending on development
and public services.295 The University of Washington’s Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation found that every dollar of health aid enables recipient governments to reduce
their own health spending by anywhere from 43 cents to $1.14.296 In her book, Aiding
and Abetting: U.S. Foreign Assistance and State Violence, political scientist Jessica
Trisko Darden found that the paradoxical result is that aid intended to help the citizens
of oppressive regimes enables those regimes to become more oppressive by increasing
spending on coercion and repression.297 The book also drew on four decades of data on
U.S. economic and military aid, and found that, in this way aid can have the unintended
effect of increasing human rights abuses and repression, especially in weak states with
recent histories of war.298
This budgetary trickery is not unique to Afghanistan. After South Sudan achieved
independence, it spent forty-four percent of its budget on the security forces and
only 11 percent on health, education, and humanitarian affairs combined.299 In turn,
more than 80 percent of defense spending went to wages and allowances, in order to
consolidate the support of security forces.300
In addition, in hostile regimes, informal means of revenue collection and a general lack
of budget transparency enable political elites to misappropriate public funds.301 The
Taliban’s lack of transparency regarding their revenue and expenditures makes it difficult
to determine when donors are being asked to pay for services that the Taliban would
have funded themselves.302
One particularly clear instance of how foreign aid allows the Taliban to cut its own
spending on social services occurred in the winter of 2022. At the time, there was
an argument that, by funding part of the cost of the education system, donors would
incentivize the Taliban to restore girls’ access to education. But after UNICEF paid
almost 200,000 teachers supplements equivalent to two months’ worth of salaries, the
Taliban withheld the same amount from their pay, thereby redirecting that money while
making no changes to their education policies.303
Aid diverted toward military spending can be a useful mechanism for autocratic
governments.304 According to a U.S. Institute of Peace report, retaining and rewarding
their security forces is one of the Taliban’s top priorities. This patronage network “extends
beyond fighters to the families and interpersonal networks of their veterans, as well as the
tens of thousands of war dead, who the Taliban refer to as martyrs,” the report said.305

AUGUST 2025 | 29

CHAPTER 3

THE TALIBAN MAY USE CASH SHIPMENTS AND
EXCHANGE RATE MANIPULATION TO TURN AID
INTO PROFIT

E

ven before the Taliban takeover, a significant amount of money—roughly
$250 million every three months—was delivered to Afghanistan via pallets of
U.S. dollars flown into the country.306 This practice was the indirect result of sanctions
designed to punish money launderers and terrorists. Because of those sanctions,
wire transfers—the usual means of moving money around the world—exposed
intermediary banks to the risk of violating the law by inadvertently doing business
with entities owned by sanctioned individuals.307
After the imposition of sanctions on doing business with Taliban-controlled entities,
airborne cash infusions became the primary means by which donors funded
humanitarian aid. 308 In 2022 and 2023, the UN flew at least $3.6 billion in cash into
the country. 309 This amounted to roughly $40 million in cash per week, money
intended to fund the work of 19 UN entities, the World Bank, Asian Development
Bank, and 49 NGOs.310
This practice came to public attention in November 2022, when the Talibancontrolled Afghan central bank posted a photo of a pallet of what it said was U.S.
currency, along with a boast that it had received three cash injections of $40 million
each.311 The following month, a Foreign Policy article alleged that “much of the
[aid] money [flown into the country] never reaches those who need it” and that
“unknown quantities are stolen by Taliban.”312 In March 2023, the then-chairman of

AUGUST 2025 | 31

A pallet of cash, part of
a $40 million package of
aid arrived in Afghanistan
and was deposited in a
commercial bank in Kabul
in December 2021. (Da
Afghanistan Bank photo)

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

the House Foreign Affairs Committee asked SIGAR to investigate “the impact of
the introduction of large amounts of U.S. dollars into the Afghanistan economy and
their beneficiaries.”313 SIGAR was unable to determine exactly how much of this
$3.6 billion came directly from the United States, but because the United States was
the single largest donor to UN agencies operating in Afghanistan, it is safe to assume
it was a significant portion. 314
SIGAR interviewed a range of sources, including current and former officials from the
Afghan central bank, Afghan commercial banks, UN officials, U.S. Treasury Department,
and the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank, as well as money exchangers in Kabul and five other
provinces.315 Several of these sources alleged that the Taliban and powerbrokers with
ties to them are taking advantage of their control of the country’s foreign exchange
markets to manipulate the value of the afghani and make money through arbitrage.316
Before the Taliban takeover, aid money transported by plane was deposited into
the Afghan central bank, known as Da Afghanistan Bank, or DAB. 317 After the
Taliban seized power, the UN began circumventing DAB by depositing cash into
a private commercial bank, the Afghanistan International Bank. 318 Even so, many
of these dollars end up in the central bank anyway after they are exchanged for
afghanis—as they must legally be, since the Taliban have imposed a ban on the
use of foreign currency. The UN and other aid organizations must exchange their
dollars for the afghanis they use to pay salaries and vendors. 319 As SIGAR reported
in a January 2024 evaluation, private banks generally do not have enough afghanis
to exchange for such large quantities of dollars and must purchase afghanis
through DAB. Through this process, the Taliban are able to accumulate large
quantities of U.S. dollars. 320

Boxes and stacks of cash arriving in Afghanistan in January 2023. (Da Afghanistan Bank photo)

32 | THE TALIBAN MAY USE CASH SHIPMENTS AND EXCHANGE RATE MANIPULATION TO TURN AID INTO PROFIT

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

Donors, the UN, and NGOs tend to focus on preventing the diversion of tangible goods
such as food, while less attention is paid to less visible types of diversion—chief
among them the risk that powerbrokers will use currency manipulation to skim off
large quantities of aid money.321 In Afghanistan, that risk is heightened by the fact
that the security measures the United States and other donors had in place under the
previous government to safeguard transactions conducted by the central bank—such as
embedded oversight personnel and on-site investigations of local currency exchanges—
disappeared when the Taliban took over.322

Currency Conversion Also Offers Opportunities for Aid Diversion Elsewhere
In places like South Sudan, Sudan, the Assad regime in Syria, and Houthi-controlled
territories of Yemen, powerbrokers use the currency conversion process to divert as much
as two-thirds of all aid into their own pockets.323
Regimes facing international sanctions routinely soften their economic effects by
skimming a percentage of aid funding at the point when foreign currency is converted
into local currency. They do so by artificially inflating the value of their local currency
relative to the foreign currency through the establishment of a fixed official exchange rate
and forcing the UN and NGOs to use that rate. Then they pocket the difference between
the official rate and the lower black-market rate. According to Radio Tamazuj, in South
Sudan in July 2015 politically connected elites bought dollars for 3 South Sudanese
pounds (SSP) each, then sold them on the black market for 9 SSP—tripling their
money.324 A variety of press and think tank sources have documented similar schemes in
recent years in countries such as South Sudan, Sudan, the former Assad regime in Syria,
and Houthi-controlled territories of Yemen.325
According to a report by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, in March 2021
the Assad regime in Syria skimmed almost two-thirds of the dollars going into regime-held
areas of the country in a similar way, allowing it to bolster its foreign currency reserves
while evading Western sanctions.326 According to the report, after forcing UN agencies to
convert dollars into Syrian pounds at the inflated official rate, the regime forced their banks
to sell half of these dollars to the central bank. The regime then profited when it sold the
dollars in the black market.327 Even after the UN negotiated a more favorable exchange rate
in September 2021, the report said, the Assad regime was still taking 32 percent of each
aid dollar coming into the country.328
According to Reuters, independent UN sanctions monitors found that in 2018, Yemen’s
Houthi-controlled central bank skimmed $423 million off $2 billion in aid from Saudi
Arabia using a similar method.329

AUGUST 2025 | 33

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

DESPITE UN ASSURANCES, DOLLARS END UP IN THE TALIBANCONTROLLED CENTRAL BANK
In January 2023, the UN published a detailed press release explaining how funds
flown into Afghanistan are distributed to UN entities and UN-approved and vetted
humanitarian partners. According to that statement, none of the money is deposited at
DAB and none goes to the Taliban. Instead, it claimed, the cash transfers are “carefully
monitored, audited, inspected, and vetted in strict accordance with UN financial rules
and processes.”330
But that press release failed to acknowledge that, despite these precautions, many dollars
still end up in the Afghan central bank. According to a former central bank official,
currency traders must legally unload these dollars by selling them to the central bank
because of the Taliban’s ban on the use of foreign currency.331 (For simplification, in this
report SIGAR will refer to any money service providers, including hawaladars, and foreign
exchange dealers as currency traders.) However, the ban on the use of foreign currency
is unevenly enforced.332 The main reason that these dollars end up in the central bank is
that private banks generally do not keep enough afghanis on hand to exchange for large
amounts of U.S. dollars.333 The former central bank official described this system as “a
very convoluted process currently controlled and orchestrated by the Taliban.”334
Donors would prefer to avoid doing any business with Afghanistan’s central bank, even
indirectly. But at the same time, they realize that injecting dollars into the economy
enables the central bank to stabilize the value of the afghani prevents the kind of
runaway inflation that was a major driver of the food crisis in the fall of 2021.335

THE TALIBAN MAY HAVE PROFITED BY MANIPULATING
EXCHANGE RATES AND RIGGING CURRENCY AUCTIONS OF
IMPORTED U.S. DOLLARS
One of DAB’s major roles is auctioning off dollars. Under regulations established by the
previous government, DAB decides when to hold an auction, who can participate, and
how much to auction off.336
The currency market in Afghanistan is dominated by just a handful of politically
connected traders.337 These traders also allegedly create, and profit from, dollar
squeezes. Currency traders in Kandahar and Kabul told SIGAR that major traders
hoard dollars to profit from arbitrage.338 (This is an example of temporal arbitrage or
buying something now with the intent of selling it in the future for a higher price.)339
By coordinating their efforts, major currency traders and DAB officials can create
a temporary shortage of dollars. Indeed, a Kabul-based currency trader told SIGAR
that the two requirements to manipulate the value of the currency are access to “huge
capital” and ties to “high-ranking officials of the government.”340 DAB’s role in licensing
and regulating the traders creates what one Afghan businessman described as “a mafia”
made up of “a closed club of people who are close to the Taliban.”341

34 | THE TALIBAN MAY USE CASH SHIPMENTS AND EXCHANGE RATE MANIPULATION TO TURN AID INTO PROFIT

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

Although DAB announces in advance the estimated amount to be exchanged, it reserves
the option to increase or decrease it without announcement before bidding.342 Before
an auction, an Afghan businessman told SIGAR, DAB officials secretly leak the exact
amount to be auctioned to currency traders with political connections. If, for example,
the bank official tells the trader that it will be auctioning fewer dollars than previously
announced, that makes each dollar more valuable. Armed with this inside information,
the trader can outbid his rivals. The trader then waits for the value of the dollar to rise
compared to the afghani, then profits on the difference between what he paid and the
higher, inflated value. The businessman says that this practice began under the previous
Afghan government and continues under the Taliban.343 Exactly where such profits go—
to individual bank officials or the Taliban regime’s coffers—is unclear.
Shifting the exchange rate even slightly can have a significant effect. If the Taliban
central bank had been able to profit 3 afghanis on each of the $3.6 billion the UN has
flown into the country since August 2021 under the circumstances outlined above, they
would have made $133 million.344
Collusion between Afghan central bank employees and currency traders is not new
under the Taliban. Abdul Qadir Fitrat, who was DAB governor between 2007 and 2011,
told SIGAR that central bank employees were caught colluding with currency traders
bidding on currency auctions in 2008 and removed from their positions.345 Wahid Nosher,
former acting governor of DAB between 2016 and 2019, described the currency market
as “monopolized,” which sometimes leads to “weird” and unexpected movements in the
value of the afghani.346

THERE IS NO LONGER ANY INTERNATIONAL OVERSIGHT OF THE
AFGHAN CENTRAL BANK
In theory, a central bank’s job is to exert control over monetary policy for the benefit of
the economy, free from outside influence by any political faction.347 In practice, politics
often affect policy. The Afghan central bank under the previous government was not
immune to external political influence.348 In Taliban-controlled Afghanistan, however, the
risk of politicization is internal and specific—namely that central bank officials will rig
currency auctions and manipulate the value of the afghani for profit.
The previous Afghan government established several systems intended to reduce
the politicization of the central bank. Before the Taliban takeover, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) had an active presence in Kabul, monitoring money supply and
bank deposits and working with the bank to maintain exchange rate and price stability.
IMF staff regularly double-checked information received from the bank’s leadership by
interviewing bank staff, currency traders and their staff, and hawala dealers in Kabul’s
main currency exchange market, Sarai Shahzada.349 Former central bank governor Fitrat
said that during his tenure, IMF employees would tell the central bank how much money
should be in circulation and how much in reserves.350 Similarly, the World Bank and the
United States had embedded advisors.351

AUGUST 2025 | 35

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

According to a State Department response to a SIGAR request for information, “the
IMF has had no formal presence or contact within the country or with DAB” since
the Taliban takeover.352 Even if it did, said Fitrat, the Taliban would likely insist on
providing them with armed escorts to monitor their work. Thus, neither bank staff nor
businessmen in Sarai Shahzada would be able to speak freely with them.353
Fitrat described the central bank under the previous government as “relatively
independent,” but the Taliban central bank’s systems are much weaker, with a 2023
USAID assessment sounding the alarm that the Taliban’s supreme leader could directly
meddle with the bank’s affairs.354
In 2023, the bank’s three highest ranking officials (a governor and two deputy governors)
were Taliban loyalists who were sanctioned by the United States and UN.355 One of these
deputy governors, whom the United States, United Nations, and European Union have
sanctioned because of his role in financing terrorist attacks, was then elevated to the top
job in July 2024.356 Prior to the Taliban takeover, the bank’s governor, Noor Ahmad Agha,
had been responsible for managing and distributing funding for the insurgent Taliban’s
military operations, including IED attacks.357 Therefore, the former financier of terrorist
groups is now responsible for countering terrorism financing.358

36 | THE TALIBAN MAY USE CASH SHIPMENTS AND EXCHANGE RATE MANIPULATION TO TURN AID INTO PROFIT

CHAPTER 4

CURRENT DONOR STRATEGIES FOR
DELIVERING AID ARE INSUFFICIENT TO
PREVENT DIVERSION

O

fficially, donors maintain that none of their money is going to the Taliban. In reality,
a combination of funding pressures and public relations concerns encourage aid
organizations to conceal how much of their aid winds up in places it was not intended
to go. Facing pressure to demonstrate success and avoid scandal, donors leave their
partners to deal with handling diversion risk; those partners are incentivized to
downplay or hide instances of diversion to maintain their funding and their access to
populations who need their help. One UN official said, “Donors love to hear about aid
diversion, but then they don’t do anything. . .Diversion has become about checking
boxes, not actually solving the problem.”359 The result is a “don’t ask, don’t tell” culture
that undermines the principles of transparency and accountability that the sector
purports to uphold.360
This chapter discusses how donors, implementing partners, and multilateral
organizations wind up in this perverse cycle of risk transfer and obfuscation. It also
highlights how increasing reliance on multilateral organizations, particularly UN
agencies, may exacerbate these issues in Afghanistan.

AUGUST 2025 | 39

Volunteers at a woman-led,
UNDP-funded community
kitchen pass out food to
communities in need in the
aftermath of an October
2024 earthquake. (UNAMA
photo)

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

POLICIES PROHIBITING ENGAGEMENT WITH THE TALIBAN IGNORE
THE REALITY THAT AID CANNOT BE DELIVERED WITHOUT IT
Aid programs, including some U.S.-funded projects, were implemented in Talibancontrolled territory long before the Taliban takeover.361 Many NGO workers had quiet
interactions—or even well-established relationships—with Taliban officials for years
before the government’s collapse.362 Yet NGOs in such situations work in a policy no
man’s land. The official policy of their organization or government might mandate no
contact with hostile groups, but if such a group controls the territory where a project is
meant to be implemented, contact is unavoidable.
After the Taliban takeover, NGO interactions with Taliban officials became much
more fraught. Donors were generally uncomfortable with or even openly hostile to
engagement with the Taliban, yet the aid programs they were funding required NGO
staff to communicate regularly with Taliban officials.363 The NGO staff did so, generally
without guidance from donors on how to proceed.364 A USAID implementing partner
told SIGAR that, more than a year after the takeover, they had no written guidance from
USAID on how to deal with Taliban authorities. 365
A UN evaluation of the humanitarian response in Afghanistan found that local-level
engagement between NGO staff and the Taliban tended to focus on specific pragmatic
issues and was somewhat productive.366 NGO workers interviewed for this report gave
SIGAR many examples of engagement and negotiation on topics ranging from gender
segregation policies to beneficiary selection.367

DONORS HAVE STRICT ZERO TOLERANCE POLICIES ABOUT AID
DIVERSION, BUT ENFORCEMENT IS INCONSISTENT
USAID, the agency through which most U.S. assistance to Afghanistan flowed prior to
the aid pause and termination of awards to the country, took a “zero-tolerance approach
toward fraud, corruption, or violation of law that involves U.S. taxpayer funds.”368 The
agency also required its partners to “report all incidents of diversion, fraud, waste, and
abuse to USAID staff and the USAID Office of the Inspector General.” This includes
even minor issues: “There is no minimum reporting requirement for partners.”369 The
agency mandated that its implementing partners certify that, in the three years prior
to receiving an award, they have not knowingly engaged in transactions or provided
material support or resources to entities subject to U.S. or UN sanctions.370 At least two
USAID partners admitted to having made false certifications about past material support
to the government of Iran and Hezbollah, respectively, and were forced to pay monetary
settlements to the U.S. government.371
The U.S. government and UN have longstanding sanctions against many senior Taliban
officials that bar them from normal trade relations and prohibit them from receiving
any resources, including aid.372 Congress reiterated these prohibitions in March 2022
by including in the fiscal year 2022 appropriations act that no U.S. government funding
“may be made available for direct assistance to the Taliban.”373

40 | CURRENT DONOR STRATEGIES FOR DELIVERING AID ARE INSUFFICIENT TO PREVENT DIVERSION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

FIGURE 2

Contradictions between UN Regulations and Taliban Laws and
Guidance
CATEGORY

Information Sharing

UN REGULATION
UNICEF, UNHCR and WFP all
require the implementing
partners keep data and
information confidential.
UNHCR and WFP explicitly
stipluate that information
related to beneficiaries must
be protected.
UNICEF requires implementing
partners to hire technically and
professionally competant staff.

Hiring Interference

A WFP risk assessment
provides the example of
"drawing local staff
disproportionally from one
ethnic or political group" as a
practice that would threaten
the sustainablity and success
of an operation.
UNHCR and WFP jointly
emphasize prioritizing people
who are most in need.

Beneficiary Selection

Payments to Terrorists

WFP requires that implementers
serve beneficiaries "with
complete impartiality regardless
of race, religion, nationality,
political opinion, disabilty, sex
or gender."
UNICEF, UNHCR and WFP all
prohibit their partners from
intentionally directing any
resources to terrorist entities
and require partners to ensure
this does not happen.

TALIBAN LAW
The Taliban's
"regulations" require
implementing partners
to share their survey
data with the ministry
overseeing the project.

Multiple interviewees
reported that the
Taliban routinely
interfere in hiring and
require NGOs to hire
unqualified people.
Interviewees also
reported that the vast
majority of WFP staff
are Pashtun.

The Taliban require
NGOs to put their
relatives on
beneficiary lists and
interfere in aid
delivery based on
ethnicity, religious
sect, and political
affiliation.

NGOs have reported
that it is virtually
impossible to avoid
paying taxes to the
Taliban.

Source: World Food Programme, "General Conditions on the Field Level Agreement," February 2024, pp. 1, 8; UNHCR,
"General Conditions of Conduct for Bilateral Project Partnership Agreements," September 2023, pp. 9–10; UNICEF,
“General Terms and Conditions for Implementing Partners,” n.d., pp. 1–2, 8; WFP, “WFP Environmental and Social
Sustainability Framework: Module 3: WFP Environmental and Social Safeguards for Programme Activities,” March 2021, p.
22; UNHCR and WFP, “UNHCR-WFP Joint Targeting Guidelines,” December 3, 2020, slide 10; UNHCR and WFP, “Joint
Guidance: Targeting of Assistance to Meet Basic Needs,” n.d., p. 8; Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, "The procedure for
coordinating the activities and regulating the affairs of domestic and foreign institutions and NGOs," Ministry of Economy,
October 22, 2022 (translation by Link Translations), pp. 5–6; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 25, 2023; NGO director, SIGAR interview, October
2, 2023; NGO director, SIGAR interview, February 16, 2024.

AUGUST 2025 | 41

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

But at roughly the same time, in late 2021 and early 2022, the Treasury Department’s
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) issued a series of general licenses that
function as sanctions “carveouts.” These make exceptions for international and
local NGOs that “meet basic human needs” or support healthcare, education, food
assistance, and protection of human rights, among others.374 These exceptions permit
these organizations to engage with the Taliban when it is absolutely necessary, such
as when paying taxes or for establishing public utility services.375 OFAC requires aid
organizations to report situations in which, in order to provide humanitarian assistance,
they are forced to provide funds or other assistance to sanctioned individuals in a way
that is not covered by existing exceptions. OFAC will then “address such issues on a
case-by-case basis in an expeditious manner.”376
The UN Development Programme’s Adaptive Management and Risk Mitigation Strategy
states that no support can be provided directly or indirectly to the Taliban authorities.377
The UN’s standard under the 1999 International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism is similar, prohibiting “making funds, financial assets, or
economic resources available directly or indirectly to designated persons or groups.”378
In 2023, World Food Programme Executive Director Cindy McCain announced that her
agency has a “zero tolerance policy for theft and diversion.”379
But these policies, which appear to be so strict on paper, do not define “diversion,” and
the effect is to give aid organizations latitude to define it in ways that suit their own
purposes. In August 2023, a diplomatic cable from the State Department’s Afghanistan
Affairs Unit stated that the director of UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for Afghanistan “insisted that OCHA does not have any evidence that aid
diversion is either systemic or wide-ranging,” and claimed that Taliban manipulation
of beneficiary lists and hiring interference—tactics which the Taliban use to steal
assistance—do not constitute “actual misdirecting or theft of assistance.”380
As early as 2014, many aid organizations noted this lack of definitional clarity. Nearly
50 humanitarian organizations interviewed as part of a 2014 Harvard Law School report
on antidiversion policies “indicated a desire for increased clarity around donors’ antidiversion policies and standards” and expressed concern that donors had not standardized
their antidiversion requirements. Current policies, the report said, form a “latticework of
disparate standards” and “different levels of enforcement and scrutiny.”381

Donors’ Zero-Tolerance for Diversion Leads to Concealment
The ambiguity about what constitutes “diversion” increases pressure on implementing
partners, who know they will pay a steep price if they are found guilty of allowing
it to happen. According to the Conflict Sensitivity Facility, a body that promotes aid
effectiveness in South Sudan, NGOs face penalties including “termination of funding,
being barred from bidding for future work, investigations, and reputational risk.”382 In
recent years, the United States has prosecuted implementing partners for providing
material support to terrorists. In 2018, the United States fined Norwegian People’s Aid, a
USAID implementing partner, over $2 million for failing to report past material support

42 | CURRENT DONOR STRATEGIES FOR DELIVERING AID ARE INSUFFICIENT TO PREVENT DIVERSION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

to Iran and for allowing individuals affiliated with Hamas and two other designated
entities to participate in trainings.383
Uncertainty about how zero tolerance policies are enforced adds to the pressure. In a
2022 internal memo about contributions to the World Bank’s Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund, USAID admitted that direct assistance to the Taliban is not defined, and
determinations of whether it happened are “made on a case-by-case basis.”384 A report
by the Center for Strategic and International Studies found that “donor governments
choose to ignore the reality in which NGOs are working, instead choosing to pick and
choose violations that come across their desk.”385
Zero tolerance policies are often impossible to fulfill.386 A fellow at New York
University’s Center for International Cooperation and a former NGO manager in
Afghanistan, has cautioned that there are no foolproof guarantees that funds will
entirely reach their intended targets without any diversion by Taliban authorities.387 A
UN official told SIGAR, “It is normal for aid to be coopted into patronage networks.”388
Meanwhile, the quest for that impossible goal means more compliance and reporting
work, which may at a certain point become counter-productive. One former USAID
official with decades of experience working on humanitarian aid in conflict zones told
SIGAR that NGOs are increasingly recruiting staff to work not on aid delivery but on
donor reporting and government relations.389 SIGAR’s 2021 report The Risk of Doing
the Wrong Thing Perfectly: Monitoring and Evaluation of Reconstruction Contracting
in Afghanistan also addressed this issue, recommending that the Secretary of State
and the USAID Administrator “assess whether minimizing or modifying administrative
requirements for compliance and [monitoring and evaluation] would result in more time
available to assess program effectiveness.”390
Aid organizations’ negotiations with the regime are often informal and secretive, and
“junior staff members are often left to handle dilemmas stemming from demands of local
power brokers, such as deciding whether to pay bribes, agree to share beneficiary lists,
favour a power broker’s candidate for contractual jobs, or report diversion or taxation”
with little support.391 These frontline aid workers often conceal the compromises they
have to make to keep delivering aid; higher-ups are left unaware of what is happening
in the field.392 Even third-party monitors aware of what is happening may not report
diversion for fear of losing their jobs or of violence from the regime itself.393
This silence has consequences. A British government report found that this lack of open
discussion about aid diversion “has made it difficult for donors [and] implementing
partners to allocate resources and engage with the challenge appropriately.”394 Without
open discussion, donors cannot assess whether compromises made by their partners are
appropriate and justifiable.395 A former UN official explained to SIGAR that “the distance
between the imaginary [zero-tolerance] world of donors and the reality on the ground
creates opportunities for mismanagement, corruption, and fake scandals.”396

AUGUST 2025 | 43

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

Returnee families in Afghanistan’s Central Highlands Region receive non-food items and “cold packages” from
UN agencies to keep them warm in January 2013. (UNAMA photo by Aurora Verceles Alambra)

To Ensure Programs Continue to be Funded, Diversion May Be Ignored
and Success Stories Emphasized
State Department officials overseas face pressure from those at headquarters in
Washington and from Congress to report that their projects have been successful in
order to protect and increase funding for their programs and portfolios.397 The amount
of money “successfully” spent in a year is often the starting point for the following year’s
budget.398 U.S. officials may be unreceptive to hearing about difficult compromises their
UN, NGO, and other implementing partners must make with the Taliban and similar
regimes in order to deliver aid. According to a variety of sources, instead of accepting
the reality that some of it will be diverted, they pretend diversion does not occur.399
A former USAID official told SIGAR about debates within that agency over whether
anything should be done to combat diversion, but “we got stuck on what to do about
it.”400 Reluctance to pause aid is most acute when it comes to lifesaving humanitarian
assistance. A former State official described to SIGAR debates about whether to reduce
aid in response to the outbreak of civil war in South Sudan in 2013. Any time a suggestion
was made that the United States should hold the South Sudanese government accountable
for diversion or corruption, she said, “someone would say, ‘but we can’t let babies starve,’
and that shut down the whole conversation.” The government’s diversion of aid resources
was visible in the sudden wealth in the capital city, “so everyone knew it was happening,
but these conversations were happening over beers, rather than in upper-level meetings.”
In her opinion, the lack of conditions on U.S. aid made the war deadlier.401
Aid organizations face another disincentive for being honest about the reality of aid
diversion: the desire to stay in business. As one implementing partner told SIGAR,
“We must show we are providing assistance in order to keep getting funding.”402

44 | CURRENT DONOR STRATEGIES FOR DELIVERING AID ARE INSUFFICIENT TO PREVENT DIVERSION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

The chairman of World Hazara Council’s U.S. branch, told SIGAR that NGOs do not
[communicate anything about Taliban interference] to the UN or other international
organizations because . . . they don’t want to be fired or shut down for reporting that the
Taliban have a hand in their work.403 One Afghan NGO official told SIGAR that when he
complained to the leadership of an international NGO that their field office was allowing
the Taliban to interfere with their hiring policies, “their response was to deny that there
was a problem at all.”404
Despite internal policies to protect whistleblowers, aid workers are often reluctant to
report diversion due to the real risk of retaliation. Junior field officers in a position to
document cases of aid misuse may suffer consequences from the individuals implicated,
especially if the field officer is from the local community.405 Another factor is the difficulty
of defining “corruption.” In Western culture, hiring relatives is often seen as nepotism,
but in other cultures it is normal to trust one’s relatives or fellow tribe members
over a stranger, no matter how well qualified that stranger may be.406 Adding to these
disincentives is the time it takes to investigate allegations, a process that has the potential
to stop a project’s operations and open the organization up to additional investigations.407
Finally, there is the pressure of short-term funding cycles. The 2022 humanitarian appeal
in Afghanistan, the largest single-country appeal by the UN’s Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs at the time, saw a rapid increase in aid funding from $2.1 billion
to $3.9 billion. This necessitated a swift scale-up in programming, leading to the rapid
hiring of new staff who were often unprepared to navigate aid diversion dilemmas.
NGOs faced pressure to expand into newly accessible areas, a process that typically
requires a year for proper establishment but was compressed into weeks or months.408
As one donor official told SIGAR, an agency given six months to spend $200 million
dollars when it was used to receiving a tenth of that amount is not likely to have the
necessary capacity on the team to disburse that money properly. But “if we don’t take it,
then we get less the next time around.”409
This boom-and-bust funding cycle creates perverse incentives and prevents addressing
underlying drivers of crises. An Afghanistan Analysts Network report found that
“reliable long-term funding” would enable aid workers to “take a firmer stand against
diversion demands because they are less concerned about [losing] their jobs or about
their organization’s survival.”410

Competition Among UN Agencies and NGOs Increases the Likelihood
They Will Acquiesce to Taliban Demands
Competition among UN agencies and NGOs working in Afghanistan also drives
diversion. Sending funding through the UN before it reaches the NGOs actually doing
the work exacerbates this challenge, as UN agencies pressure NGOs to “deliver at all
costs.”411 Donors incentivize UN agencies and NGOs to reach more beneficiaries more
quickly by rewarding them with more funding and contracts for doing so, rather than
prioritizing the quality and impact of aid. This “corporate growth” mentality leads
agencies to focus on maximizing the volume of aid delivered rather than mitigating harm

AUGUST 2025 | 45

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

or diversion.412 Donors want to be able to deliver aid in the hardest to reach places,
meaning partner NGOs competing for contracts must figure out a way to reach those
places, even if it means complying with a regime’s demands.413
This environment discourages collective action, allowing the Taliban to play UN
agencies and NGOs against each other.414 As organizations negotiate with the Taliban
separately and covertly, the result, experts say, is “a more fragmented, less principled
and less effective humanitarian counterpoint to Taliban demands.”415 As one NGO official
told SIGAR, “if one of us caves, we lose strength in numbers.”416

DONORS DISAGREE ON HOW TO ENGAGE THE TALIBAN
In the United States, the 1986 Foreign Assistance and Related Programs Appropriations
Act prohibits providing funds to any regime that has overthrown an elected government.
Funds can continue to support a population living under such a regime, provided they
are not directed to the regime itself.417 On paper, these distinctions seem clear. In real
life, they are anything but.
In reality, what happens is that long-term development aid for such things as
infrastructure and education is reduced or comes to a halt, while humanitarian aid
increases, usually routed through large multilateral organizations such as the UN or the
World Bank.418 But once donors send aid to multilateral organizations, they lose visibility
over exactly how their money is used, and the nature of those organizations’ day-to-day
dealings with the hostile regime.419
Over time, in an effort to do more sustainable programming that costs less and
reaches greater numbers of people, donors begin to push the limits of what constitutes
emergency aid, while trying to minimize benefits to or cooperation with the hostile
regime.420 As that happens, the line between humanitarian and development aid
inevitably begins to blur.421 Meanwhile, the day-to-day logistics of delivering
humanitarian aid to vulnerable populations involve negotiation, legal interpretation,
improvisation, and—inevitably—extensive engagement with the hostile regime.
Additionally, different countries have different boundaries on the kinds of engagement
they find acceptable.422 A report from the UN Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, a group of experts established to support the enforcement of
sanctions against the Taliban, pointed to the “absence of any internationally agreed
multilateral strategy on how to deal with the Taliban” as a key factor in the regime’s
consolidation of power and backsliding on governance promises.423
This underscores the need for a cohesive, coordinated approach among international
actors. Standardizing the language in agreements between UN agencies, implementing
partners, and the Taliban could help create a united front. However, this approach
must be carefully managed to avoid exacerbating mistrust between humanitarian
organizations and the UN. One USAID official told SIGAR that during the Assad regime

46 | CURRENT DONOR STRATEGIES FOR DELIVERING AID ARE INSUFFICIENT TO PREVENT DIVERSION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

in Syria, implementers were concerned that if the UN were to lead negotiations with the
government, they would agree to policies that implementers opposed.424
The U.S. Institute of Peace similarly found a pattern of UN agencies and larger NGOs
capitulating to Taliban demands and undermining the ability of other organizations to
resist.425 Likewise, a UN official told SIGAR that UN agencies pressured the NGOs they
funded to agree to Taliban demands, a dynamic that she had also observed with the UN
under the Houthis in Yemen.426

U.S. Policy Does Not Recognize the Taliban, but Back-Channel
Communication Still Takes Place
The American embassy in Kabul remains closed; the Afghan embassy in Washington
shut down in early 2022 after running out of funding from the previous government.427
The United States cannot enter any formal agreements or exchange diplomats with a
government it does not recognize. And yet, over the past four years the United States
and the Taliban have developed ways of talking to each other.428
In early October 2021, a U.S. delegation including David Cohen, deputy director of the
Central Intelligence Agency, and deputy Afghanistan envoy Tom West met with senior
Taliban officials, including interim foreign minister Amir Khan Muttaqi.429 On October 20,
2021, West was appointed Special Representative for Afghanistan, and he continued
to engage with Taliban representatives and technical professionals on humanitarian
assistance until his departure in October 2024.430 In February 2022, State created the
Afghanistan Affairs Unit to represent the U.S. diplomatic mission to Afghanistan. It is
based in Doha, Qatar, where the Taliban also maintain a presence.431
Between October 2021 and July 2023, there were at least five meetings between
unnamed Taliban representatives and U.S. delegations, including Special Representative
West, Rina Amiri, the U.S. special envoy for Afghan women, girls, and human rights, and
Chief of the Afghanistan Affairs Unit Karen Decker.432 Additional technical meetings on
counternarcotics and economic stabilization occurred between late 2023 and the spring
of 2024.433 By the summer of 2024, this engagement included weekly meetings with the
Taliban delegation in Doha.434
A November 2022 report by State’s Office of Inspector General found that the Afghanistan
Affairs Unit personnel “met regularly with Doha-based Taliban representatives,” using a
communication channel originally created to deconflict battlefield movements during the
withdrawal.435 Even before the creation of the Afghanistan Affairs Unit, a November 2021
diplomatic cable stated that the Embassy Kabul team (by that point, relocated to Doha)
“regularly engage[d]” the Taliban.436 In late 2023, the Afghanistan Affairs Unit released
an Integrated Country Strategy describing their engagement with the Taliban and other
Afghan stakeholders on a variety of strategic interests.437

AUGUST 2025 | 47

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

The UN, the European Union, and Regional Actors Each Have Their Own
Approach to Dealing with the Taliban
The UN’s policy on engagement is that interaction with the Taliban, including
incidental contact with sanctioned individuals, is permissible to the extent required
to deliver humanitarian aid.438 The UN does not recognize the Taliban as a legitimate
government.439 Sanctions imposed by the UN largely prevent Taliban officials from
traveling outside of Afghanistan.440
However, in February 2024, the Taliban were invited to a two-day UN-led conference in
Doha. In response, they presented a set of conditions for their attendance, including a
requirement that they be recognized “as the only official representative of Afghanistan.”
The UN rejected that as unacceptable, and the conference proceeded without them.441
A subsequent UN conference in Doha at the end of June 2024, was attended by both
Taliban and U.S. officials. Non-Taliban Afghan representatives were excluded, and
several of them criticized the UN for this decision.442 The Taliban did not attend the UN
General Assembly in September 2024.443
Initially, the Council of the European Union appeared to condition engagement with the
Taliban on their formation of an inclusive government, inclusion of women in decisionmaking, and respect for human rights—conditions the Taliban have not met.444 The
European Union reestablished a “minimal presence” in Kabul in early 2022 without
recognizing the Taliban as a government. (The Taliban described the action as an official
embassy opening.)445
European countries are generally wary of the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
causing a repeat of the 2015 migration crisis, during which approximately 1 million
refugees and other migrants entered Europe.446 Germany and Italy suggested in late 2021
that even with the Taliban in control, aid should go beyond basic humanitarian needs
to include some development programming.447 As of July 2024, the United Kingdom’s
Foreign Commonwealth and Development Office allocated about 30 percent of its
Afghanistan budget to programming that goes beyond humanitarian assistance. British
officials have visited Kabul regularly since October 2023, but maintain no permanent
presence.448 In March 2025, Switzerland announced that it had reopened its humanitarian
office in Kabul, with four staff to engage with Taliban representatives at a technical
level on project implementation.449 On the other hand, France has vehemently opposed
providing any development aid. However, French military personnel have returned to
Kabul—with the Taliban’s consent—to fight ISIS-K.450
Some of Afghanistan’s neighbors and regional players, including China, Russia, Iran,
and Pakistan, still maintain embassies in Kabul and have allowed Taliban-appointed
representatives to serve at Afghan embassies in those countries.451 To date, only Russia
has formally recognized the Taliban.452

48 | CURRENT DONOR STRATEGIES FOR DELIVERING AID ARE INSUFFICIENT TO PREVENT DIVERSION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

UNDP staff provide relief in the aftermath of an earthquake in western Afghanistan that killed over 1,500
people and displaced 43,000 in October 2024. (UNAMA photo)

THE U.S. GOVERNMENT HAS HISTORICALLY HAD THE LEAST
OVERSIGHT OF AID TO THE RISKIEST PLACES
Aid to people living under hostile regimes is particularly risky because much of it
falls into two categories for which U.S. oversight requirements are relatively loose:
humanitarian aid and aid implemented in partnership with large multilateral institutions
like the UN and World Bank.453 Since the Taliban takeover, UN agencies and the World
Bank have administered 64 percent of U.S. aid to Afghanistan. Of total international
aid going to Afghanistan during the same period, 72 percent was humanitarian, as was
74 percent of U.S. aid.454 The combination of relatively loose oversight over humanitarian
aid and the problems of dealing with a hostile regime mean that, as an expert on aid
delivery summarized it, “We have the least oversight where we need it the most.”455
According to USAID’s Office of Inspector General, the agency’s lower threshold for
oversight of humanitarian aid is intended to “expedite needed funds to conflict or
disaster zones, typically for the short term.” However, as the same office has noted,
humanitarian aid often continues for many years. Even after the program is well
established and there is time to create robust oversight mechanisms, there is no
regulation or policy mandating a shift to normal oversight standards.456
In July 2022, 13 senators wrote to USAID Administrator Samantha Power expressing concern
that the Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance had fewer than five full-time contracting officers
to manage more than 1,200 programs. The letter stated that each contracting officer is
responsible for managing 10 times the total value of contracts than that of their counterparts
in the rest of the agency.457 A year prior, Administrator Power herself had informed the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee that the average USAID contracting officer managed $65 million
annually—more than four times that of their counterparts at DOD.458

AUGUST 2025 | 49

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

A woman looks over the landscape of Zendeh Jan in Herat Province in the aftermath of a devastaing
earthquake in October 2024. (UNAMA photo)

A 2021 USAID Office of Inspector General report about the agency’s humanitarian
response in Syria “revealed significant programmatic weaknesses and fraud and abuse,”
and traced those problems to agency-wide deficits in the oversight of humanitarian
programming. These deficits included not enough staff to manage the risk of fraud,
inadequate training of the staff that was there, and the need to create an anti-fraud
strategy specific to humanitarian assistance.459 Although the agency had addressed
some of these concerns by 2023, the inspector general once again identified oversight of
humanitarian aid as one of its top concerns that year.460
In a report for the Brookings Institution, a former USAID Afghanistan Mission Director
wrote that USAID largely outsources its risk management to implementing partners
who provide “insurance” against risks, including that of the Taliban diverting aid.461 In
especially high-risk environments, like Afghanistan under the Taliban, the United States
leans heavily on United Nations agencies as “pass throughs” before funding reaches the
NGOs that actually deliver aid. This additional layer of “insurance” provides political
top cover for donors: it is easier to deflect blame to the UN for high-profile diversion
scandals than to individual NGOs. The problem is that it is not clear that using the UN as
a passthrough actually reduces the risk of diversion. In fact, it may increase it.

THERE ARE RISKS AND BENEFITS TO THE U.S. GOVERNMENT’S
RELIANCE ON THE UN TO DELIVER AID IN RISKY PLACES
Until recently, the United States increasingly relied on multilateral organizations,
particularly United Nations agencies, when providing aid to people living under hostile
regimes. In 2022, about 25 percent ($12.5 billion) of the total amount that the United
States spent on foreign aid globally went to the UN.462 Between 2020 and 2022, USAID
funding to multilaterals quadrupled.463 In May 2023 in a response to a formal SIGAR
inquiry, a USAID official wrote that “all USAID humanitarian assistance supports the
work of UN agencies and experienced, carefully selected international NGOs.”464

50 | CURRENT DONOR STRATEGIES FOR DELIVERING AID ARE INSUFFICIENT TO PREVENT DIVERSION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

Donors rely on multilateral organizations to deliver humanitarian assistance for several
reasons. One is size: As one USAID official noted, “The UN can deliver at a scale that is
unrivaled by NGOs—it’s a machine.”465 This advantage is particularly pronounced when
it comes to scaling up logistics to deliver goods such as food.466
Speed and staffing constraints also drive this reliance. It can take USAID up to a year to
vet and approve a local NGO partner, but it is quick and simple for the agency to solesource an award to the UN, the U.S. government’s go-to partner in a crisis.467 One U.S.
official told SIGAR that lighter oversight requirements allow the UN “to devote more
staff and energy to implementation.”468 A USAID official agreed, noting that “you just
needed a one-page concept paper that took them very little time to draw up, and that’s a
win 24 hours after an emergency.”469
The UN’s status as an intergovernmental body and the global legitimacy it brings may
also provide advantages when engaging directly with host country governments—as,
for instance, in Sudan, where the UN’s relationship with the government makes it easier
for them to obtain visas for expatriate staff and to import goods.470 Finally, donors rely
heavily on multilateral organizations because they serve as a buffer against criticism—
especially in hostile regimes, where risks of diversion and scandal are especially high.
Serving as just one of many donors to a UN agency makes it more politically palatable to
continue sending aid to a country ruled by a hostile regime.471
But the hazards of this strategy are increasingly evident: a lack of transparency and
minimal oversight on aid delivery programs, questions of effectiveness and agility in
delivering certain types of aid, and the burdening of local NGOs with all the risks of
dealing with aid diversion.472 Despite the risks of losing funding, five interviewees told
SIGAR they personally reported Taliban meddling in hiring, distribution, and kickback
schemes to the UN and asked for help dealing with them. All five told SIGAR that their
UN contacts failed to act in response to their allegations.473
Until recently, USAID did not require global aid agencies to report serious criminal
misconduct such as fraud or theft.474 Following a 2020 revision, USAID’s standard
template for awards to multilateral organizations includes the requirement to report
allegations of “fraud, corruption, collusion or coercion.”475 However, SIGAR’s March
2025 audit of multilateral organizations found that both State and USAID still sometimes
fail to require multilateral organizations to do so.476 The result is that UN agencies
such as the World Food Programme and UNICEF, which handle the majority of USAID
assistance to Afghanistan, receive the least oversight.477
The same audit recommended best practices for how State and USAID should improve
their oversight of large multilateral institutions. SIGAR recommended that State
standardize its pre-award reviews to make sure each multilateral can adequately
safeguard U.S. funding. Other recommendations included negotiating the right for
the U.S. government to conduct visits to project sites or to hire third-party monitors,
requiring multilaterals to create written monitoring plans, and requiring them to report

AUGUST 2025 | 51

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

about the performance of their programs. The audit also found that these institutions
need to improve their oversight of downstream NGOs and implementing partners,
particularly with regards to financial reporting.478
The U.S. government’s heavy reliance on multilaterals is also driven by a prevalent
misperception that because of the UN’s principles of neutrality and impartiality, aid
routed through them is somehow less susceptible to diversion, money laundering, or
inadvertent terror financing.479 However, USAID’s Office of Inspector General has found
that oversight offices at UNICEF, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, and other
large multilaterals do not always promptly or adequately report fraud, and that they
may lack independence.480 As an Afghanistan expert has argued, “It is a fallacy to think
that humanitarian aid provided through the UN system is...exempt from the risks of
money laundering and inadvertently funding terrorism, diversion from intended uses,
corruption, and other financial risks.”481
Moreover, the UN often works through government-affiliated businesses and
organizations, some of which may be sanctioned or involved in human rights violations.
Additionally, the UN agencies are not bound by U.S. or European Union sanctions.482
While UN suppliers have a code of conduct that states that they are expected to protect
human rights and ensure they are not complicit in abuse, a report by the Center for
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) identified numerous individuals implicated in
human right abuses who were UN partners or contractors, or otherwise benefited from
UN funds in that country.483

A woman washes rice at a UNDP-funded, woman-led community kitchen. The kitchen provided about 600
meals daily to communities in need in the aftermath of an October 2024 earthquake. (UNAMA photo)

52 | CURRENT DONOR STRATEGIES FOR DELIVERING AID ARE INSUFFICIENT TO PREVENT DIVERSION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

According to a report by Ahmad Nader Nadery, former chairman of the previous
Afghan government’s Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission (IARCSC), UN agencies are able to operate and deliver aid in sanctioned
environments, under the close oversight of the authorities, but they are “rarely
perceived as neutral actors by the local population.”484
Removing the additional layer of UN agencies between donors and NGOs could provide
more flexibility in programming and increase aid effectiveness. A USAID official
told SIGAR that when UN agencies play this role, it reduces donors’ visibility into
implementation, which can lead to more diversion. She also said that NGOs are able
to be more responsive to changing circumstances on the ground and in shifting to new
beneficiaries, and that giving aid directly to them increases the chance that aid will
reach the right people.485 In an effort to increase transparency and oversight, according
to the same report by the former IARCSC chairman under the previous Afghan
government, the UN should become the primary mechanism for delivering aid in these
contexts only if they are independently monitored, and if they ensure principled and
conflict-sensitive approaches to aid delivery.486
According to experts on humanitarian access negotiations from Doctors Without
Borders and others, although the UN has an advantage in logistics, smaller organizations
are more flexible and can make quick decisions when necessary.487 An NGO official
told SIGAR that, although the World Food Programme has an advantage over smaller
NGOs when it comes to distributing food in bulk, NGOs are more efficient when
implementing cash assistance or cash-for-work programs. This is because NGOs often
have long-established relationships with local leaders who can facilitate their access
to areas where multilateral agencies have no local contacts.488 According to the same
Doctors Without Borders experts, because of their lower political profile compared
to the UN, smaller organizations also find it easier to establish trust and credibility
when negotiating, giving them a comparative advantage at the operational field level.489
According to multiple sources, NGOs also tend to be more capable of switching
locations and partners to respond to new areas of need.490 In contrast, UN officials tend
to have limited visibility and access to on-the-ground information because, as one NGO
official said, they “never leave their compounds.”491

AUGUST 2025 | 53

CHAPTER 5

LESSONS FROM THE U.S. EXPERIENCE IN
AFGHANISTAN CAN HELP INFORM FOREIGN
AID REFORM

S

ince the Taliban takeover, donors largely shifted funding to humanitarian programs
in Afghanistan. Some experts have raised concern that humanitarian aid alone will
not meet the basic needs of the population.492 They argued that greater engagement with
the Taliban, including in some cases through limited technical assistance—such as skills
training, expert advice, and research-sharing—is required to sustain the delivery of basic
services in Afghanistan, as well as in other hostile regimes.493
A June 2024 report by the Center for Strategic and International Studies found that recent
decreases in donor funding for aid to Afghanistan “have underscored the urgency of
resuming development assistance.” Specifically, the report called on donors to “promote
sustainable economic development through a policy of principled, limited engagement.”494
Cooperation with hostile regimes is already happening in some places. In Yemen, an
NGO official told SIGAR, the UN’s World Food Programme is working with the Houthi
Ministry of Education to provide aid in Houthi-controlled parts of that country.495
Another NGO official told SIGAR about his organization’s support to the Syrian
Ministry of Water Supply. Although the United States and the Assad regime were formal
adversaries, the NGO official described the ministry as simply “a building of people
interested in pipes and flanges” whose focus was not geopolitics but simply providing
water to their communities. Some, he pointed out, had even lost their lives trying to
keep the system functioning during conflict.496

AUGUST 2025 | 55

Workers at a road
construction site in Jawzjan
Province, Afghanistan in
2013. (USAID/Afghanistan
photo)

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

In Afghanistan, the healthcare sector is in particular need of technical assistance to slow
the erosion of 20 years of U.S. investment.497 (Under the U.S.-supported Afghan government,
donors funded healthcare in both government and Taliban-controlled areas.)498 One NGO
director told SIGAR that even though progress in the health sector is often considered one
of donors’ most significant achievements, Afghanistan’s health system “could collapse in
twenty-four hours” without external funding.499 A former UN official noted that, because
healthcare services are reliant on other systems—water and electricity—there is an
argument for technical assistance to sustain these systems, as well.500
Multiple experts have argued that Afghanistan’s current economic challenges are the
result of policies meant to isolate the Taliban.501 In mid-2024, the UN projected that an
estimated 23.7 million people would need humanitarian assistance that year.502 A UN
evaluation concluded, “The state-avoiding nature of the [humanitarian] response and
the policy and bureaucratic obstacles erected by the authorities severely limited the
impact and sustainability of the aid efforts.”503 Similarly, the UN’s Inter-Agency Standing
Committee has written that, because the crisis in Afghanistan is protracted and manmade, “the case for greater technical cooperation with ministries and departments
in life-critical services (including health, [water and sanitation], and nutrition) is
compelling.”504 A report by the Center for Strategic and International Studies argued
that “as direct cash transfers and humanitarian aid are scaled down, complementary...
investment in Afghanistan’s economy must be scaled up.”505

DONORS, UN AGENCIES DISAGREE ABOUT WHAT TYPES OF
PROGRAMMING AND ENGAGEMENT ARE APPROPRIATE UNDER
HOSTILE REGIMES, SUCH AS THE TALIBAN
Significant disagreements persist between donors, UN agencies, and NGOs about what
kinds of engagement with hostile regimes are appropriate. In Afghanistan, for example,
according to a donor official interviewed by SIGAR, the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees pursued an agreement with the Taliban Ministry of Foreign Affairs at the
beginning of 2022 to provide technical support and funding. As a result, the official
said, the United States pulled its contribution to UNHCR’s funding because its actions
conflicted with U.S. political messaging.506 An NGO official told SIGAR that stronger
consensus among donors about what types of programming are permissible in hostile
regimes would reduce reputational risks for UN agencies and legal risks for NGOs.507
Such disagreements often delay the transition from short-term humanitarian aid to
more sustainable, longer-term interventions. The same donor official told SIGAR that
it usually takes donors and the UN two to three years—and eight or nine years in the
case of Yemen—to agree to a guiding framework on how they will engage with a newly
hostile regime, a prerequisite for scaling up more sustainable support to basic service
provision.508 An April 2024 State cable described significant demand among donors
and implementing partners for a common framework detailing what engagement with
the regime should look like in each sector, including potential technical assistance
to Taliban-controlled ministries. The cable argued such a framework “would reduce

56 | LESSONS FROM THE U.S. EXPERIENCE IN AFGHANISTAN CAN HELP INFORM FUTURE FOREIGN AID REFORM

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

obstacles to service delivery” and mitigate legal risks, while “making sure the Taliban
cannot play donors off one another.”509
A USAID official managing programming in a different hostile regime told SIGAR that
there is insufficient funding for “interventions between humanitarian and development
assistance,” which she also referred to as “early recovery” programming. She blamed
this on congressional fears “that it will become development, and it will benefit the
regime.” But she lamented: “Why should we be delivering flour every day, if we can help
the community build a bakery? Why truck in water, if we could fund a water purification
plant? Investment in a small-scale solar mini-grid can facilitate access to electricity,
and therefore, water purification. We aren’t necessarily talking about repairing a power
station in Damascus. But even there, what if that would enable a hospital to reopen or
expand care? We are throwing good money after bad. In a decade the U.S. has spent
$17 billion and the needs have never been higher.”510

THE WORLD BANK HAS A STRATEGY FOR DEALING WITH HOSTILE
REGIMES; THE UN’S GUIDANCE MAY BE INSUFFICIENT
The World Bank’s launch of its 2020–2025 Fragility, Conflict, and Violence Strategy
advocated a shift toward longer-term aid to sustain basic services in these contexts.511
The Bank, which specializes in the provision of development aid, refers to this shift as
“remaining engaged during conflict and crisis situations to preserve hard-won development
gains, protect essential institutions, build resilience, and be ready for future recovery.”512 A
2023 review of the strategy found that, “where there [was] institutional consensus to do so,”
the Bank was able to “remain engaged even in the most challenging” [fragility, conflict and
violence-affected] situations” to “protect human capital, safeguard institutions, preserve
development gains, and mitigate the risks of inaction and disengagement.”513
The strategy emphasizes the importance of focusing on “the most vulnerable” populations
and using aid to address “exclusion, inequalities, and perceptions of injustice that can
drive fragility.” It makes a commitment to tackling corruption and human rights violations,
because those problems can fuel violence.514 Finally, it states that disengaging from
fragility, conflict, and violence-affected countries should be “a last resort,” because it will
disproportionately harm the most vulnerable. (According to an analysis of World Bank
data by New York University and Chatham House, approximately half of people living in
fragility, conflict, and violence-affected countries also live under hostile regimes.)515
A former UN official with decades of experience in hostile and conflict-affected
countries told SIGAR that large UN humanitarian appeals are often driven by the
need for “basic service provision,” which would be more appropriately classified as
development, rather than humanitarian aid. He lamented a tendency for “humanitarians
[to] take funding from development actors.”516 Similarly, an NGO official told SIGAR that
he welcomed the World Bank’s work in fragility, conflict, and violence-affected states,
because he said there is a need for more development work in these contexts, as needs
cannot be addressed by short-term aid alone.517

AUGUST 2025 | 57

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

A donor official with many years of experience in hostile regimes suggested establishing
guidelines for engaging with de facto authorities. She argued that the UN’s Inter-Agency
Standing Committee (IASC), which is responsible for coordinating international responses
to humanitarian crises among donors, UN agencies, and NGOs, should develop this new
policy.518 An NGO official agreed, pointing to UNICEF’s “2018 Programme Framework for
Fragile Contexts” policy as a good starting point for that discussion.519
According to the same donor official, global UN guidance would reduce the scope of
the issues to be debated and create “a reference point” for future discussions. She
told SIGAR that her goal was for this new policy to play a similarly clarifying role as
had the “Durable Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons,” which was adopted by
the UN’s Inter-Agency Standing Committee in 2010. She envisioned the new policy as
going sector-by-sector and providing guidance about what kinds of programming is
appropriate, and she also suggested that the policy should provide guidance on how
to engage with an estranged regime.520 Speaking to SIGAR, an expert on humanitarian
aid also endorsed the idea, but stressed that the guidance would need to be carefully
contextualized to fit each specific country context.521
In Afghanistan, one thing is clear: The UN’s Principles of Engagement, as described in the
Transitional Engagement Framework, are not workable. Such principles include a human
rights-based approach that the Taliban are fundamentally opposed to and operational
independence that violates the Taliban’s NGO law. They also require UN activities to
promote gender equality and women’s rights while respecting “local customs, cultures
and religions”—which includes the Taliban’s prohibition on promoting gender equality.522
The UN’s evaluation of the humanitarian response describes the “political positions of the
international community and the Taliban” as “mutually antagonistic.”523

USAID, UN, AND NGO OFFICIALS TOLD SIGAR THAT FUNNELING AID
THROUGH THE UN BEFORE IT REACHES NGOS COMES WITH RISKS
The vast majority of aid to the Afghan people is channeled through the UN and its
affiliate agencies.524 These agencies include the World Food Programme, the UN High
Commissioner for Refugees, the UN Children’s Fund, the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization, the UN Population Fund, the UN International Organization for Migration,
the World Health Organization, and the Office for Coordinating Humanitarian Assistance
—all of which until recently received U.S. funding in Afghanistan.525 (The United States
withdrew from the World Health Organization in January 2025. The next month, the White
House announced a 180-day review of United States membership in and funding for all
international organizations.)526 This has given the UN as an institution a skewed amount
of control over aid to Afghanistan and how organizations should comply with—or resist—
Taliban edicts, laws and regulations. Complicating this further, UN regulations often
directly conflict with Taliban laws, forcing NGOs to navigate impossible contradictions.527
One NGO official described the UN as “the richest de facto state in Afghanistan” and
cautioned that this concentration of power and resources has consequences donors

58 | LESSONS FROM THE U.S. EXPERIENCE IN AFGHANISTAN CAN HELP INFORM FUTURE FOREIGN AID REFORM

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

may not fully understand.528 According to a former UN official, a former NGO official,
and an Afghanistan expert, UN agencies are so enormous that policy decisions like
whether or not—or who, exactly—to pay for security have immense implications in a
sensitive environment like Afghanistan.529 Once a UN agency moves on a decision of
such magnitude, smaller organizations (including UN-funded NGOs) lose the flexibility
to make their own decisions.530
The aftermath of the Taliban’s December 2022 ban on women working in the aid sector
illustrated the UN’s influence, as well as its failure to fully use that influence. NGOs
scrambled to redesign programming to comply with both the Taliban’s ban on employing
women and UN guidelines on including women. By mid-February 2023, the UN reported
that, having negotiated many local exemptions to the ban, their programs had resumed
and their female Afghan staff were able to work in their offices. But the implementing
NGOs were excluded from these negotiations and left on their own to find solutions—and
risked having their UN contract canceled if they could not continue implementation.531
One NGO director told SIGAR he had hired a male relative to accompany each female
employee in her work, but could not comply with a subsequent Taliban demand to remove
female staff from his organization’s payroll.532 A large healthcare NGO reported that,
lacking the power to negotiate against a Taliban decree directly prohibiting women from
working for humanitarian NGOs, they were pursuing a short-term solution—providing
their female staff with the technical infrastructure to work from home.533

Providing More Funding Directly to NGOs, Rather than Passing it Through
the UN First, Could Improve Flexibility and Effectiveness
Removing the additional layer of UN agencies between donors and NGOs could
provide more flexibility in programming and increase aid effectiveness. A USAID
official told SIGAR that when UN agencies play this role, it reduces donors’ visibility
into implementation, which can lead to more diversion. She also said that NGOs are
able to be more responsive to changing circumstances on the ground and in shifting
to new beneficiaries, and that giving aid directly to them increases the chance that
aid will reach the right people.534 In an effort to increase transparency and oversight,
according to the same report by the former chairman of the Independent Administrative
Reform and Civil Service Commission under the previous Afghan government, the
UN should become the primary mechanism for delivering aid in these contexts only if
they are independently monitored, and if they ensure principled and conflict-sensitive
approaches to aid delivery.535
Because the UN is large enough to make its own decisions about how it engages with
estranged regimes, donors also may find themselves funding UN agencies that are out of
strategic alignment with them. A USAID official described the UN’s tendency to comply
with the diversionary demands of estranged regimes as “WFP, OCHA, and other UN
bodies actively working against U.S. foreign policy objectives—and using a lot of U.S.
government money to do it.” That, the official said, elevates the issue to the level of State
or the National Security Council.536

AUGUST 2025 | 59

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

The UN may not be willing to report instances where their compliance with an estranged
regime conflicts with the broader intentions of the donors funding the work. In 2018,
USAID’s Office of Inspector General found that the UN’s oversight mechanisms generally
lack the capacity to investigate fraud, theft, and diversionary acts.537 In August 2023, a
diplomatic cable from the Afghanistan Affairs Unit stated that the director of OCHA for
Afghanistan “insisted that OCHA does not have any evidence that aid diversion is either
systemic or wide-ranging,” and claimed that Taliban manipulation of beneficiary lists and
hiring interference—tactics which the Taliban use to steal assistance—are not “actual
misdirecting or theft of assistance.”538
Several interviewees argued that donors could improve aid effectiveness by maintaining
and working through a variety of types of partnerships and channels, reducing heavy
reliance on large UN agencies and diluting their share of the market.539 One NGO official
compared building a more resilient and diverse aid system to building an investment
portfolio, and cautioned against an overly negative approach: “I would not frame it as
‘WFP is too big, defund WFP,’ as that is a wholly negative way of putting it. Rather, I
would say that to create a resilient and effective humanitarian system, there needs to
be a more intentional portfolio approach. We need to invest in . . . local actors, as they
present innovation and growth opportunities, as well as risk spreading.”540
There are advantages to using the UN—they have existing networks to deliver aid
on a national scale, tend to have more influence with governments, and can create a
sometimes-desirable buffer between donor and recipient countries.541 But the UN’s
dominance in the global aid network creates some of the same problems created by
monopolies in the business world, such as stifling innovation and the development of
smaller competitors.542 Several interviewees, including UN officials, criticized the UN’s
humanitarian appeals process as overly focused on their own overhead costs, to the
detriment of local NGOs.543 A former UN official told SIGAR that the UN’s approach of
contracting individual projects to local NGOs at low reimbursement rates prevents those
organizations from growing.544
According to former USAID Afghanistan Mission Director Patrick Fine, the agency
has historically reimbursed local organizations for administrative costs at insufficient
overhead rates because these organizations have rarely completed the “difficult
and costly” process necessary to qualify for a negotiated individual cost rate
agreement (NICRA). He describes that “arduous yearslong” process as requiring the
devotion of “substantial expertise and resources.” They are only reimbursed at the de
minimus rate of 10 percent set by the Code of Federal Regulations. He has written that
studies have shown that the true cost of implementing foreign assistance programming
far exceeds this rate, as do the average government-approved administrative rates of
their international counterparts.545
A report by the Foundation for the Defense of Democracies suggested that creating
alternative channels for aid delivery, including providing support directly to successful
NGOs, would also put pressure on the UN to improve its ability to prevent diversion.546

60 | LESSONS FROM THE U.S. EXPERIENCE IN AFGHANISTAN CAN HELP INFORM FUTURE FOREIGN AID REFORM

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

A USAID official told SIGAR that, in Syria, the agency reduced funding for the UN in
2023 and shifted it to pooled funding for NGOs, managed by an international NGO.
Motivations for the shift included poor visibility into UN operations, inflexibility,
congressional concerns about oversight, and geopolitics.547
When considering how to deliver humanitarian aid, policymakers face a choice between
multilateral channels, such as UN agencies, multi-donor trust funds administered
by NGOs, and aid provided directly from donors to NGOs.548 Multi-donor trust funds
facilitate donor coordination and prevent duplication of efforts, but they can also be
slow-moving, bureaucratic entities with few grassroots connections.549 An Australian
government review of the World-Bank-administered Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund concluded that its lengthy procurement procedures and inadequate
implementation support resulted in delays which frustrated program implementers.550
A representative from a multi-donor fund explained the advantages of this kind of
system to SIGAR: Because his organization does not depend on the UN for funding,
“[we] go to UN only when they add value on a particular issue,” like leveraging the
International Labor Organization’s expertise on child labor and existing relationship
with a government.551 He told SIGAR that this approach requires a higher staff-toprogram-dollar ratio than having the UN manage the fund would, but the more laborintensive management has enabled the organization to partner directly with local NGOs
to a substantial degree.552
In contrast, aid provided directly from donors to implementing partners offers several
distinct advantages. In politically sensitive contexts, such aid can be used to support
specific initiatives or reach areas not accessible through multilateral channels, and in
some cases can bypass problematic government actors entirely.553 Moreover, shifting some
funding away from the UN to directly fund either multi-donor trust funds or individual
NGOs could also spur reforms within UN agencies seeking to regain lost trust.554
However, such a shift to more direct funding to NGOs would likely remain limited to
international NGOs, at least until some of the impediments to directly funding local NGOs
are addressed. According to former USAID Afghanistan Mission Director Patrick Fine, this
would require three major changes: (1) new, less onerous grant award and management
guidance from the Office of Management and Budget; (2) an increase in the de minimus
overhead reimbursement rate that generally applies to local NGOs; and (3) for USAID to
take responsibility for more of the risk management functions that it currently outsources
to UN agencies, international NGOs, and large contractors.555

Is the World Food Programme Too Big to Follow the Rules?
Interviewees were particularly critical of the “behemoth” WFP.556 One expert in
monitoring and evaluation described it as “too big to fail and too big to follow rules.”557
A former UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs official told SIGAR
that it was very difficult to coordinate the WFP’s work with the rest of the humanitarian
response in Afghanistan because “they argue that humanitarian principles allow

AUGUST 2025 | 61

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

[them] to deliver as much as possible, as fast as possible,” and prioritize increasing
aid delivery—and aid funding—over any coordinated strategy.558 Additionally, as
detailed on pages 18–19, SIGAR heard allegations from a number of sources about
WFP staff extorting kickbacks from WFP contractors and sometimes collaborating
with the Taliban to do so, as well as directing contracts to NGOs that they had personal
affiliations and financial interests in.559

Aid Suspensions Are a Useful Tool for Combating Diversion
Several U.S. government officials told SIGAR that aid suspensions are used infrequently,
because they impose significant costs to needy people.560 In 2024 an Afghanistan
expert wrote “The humanitarian sector needs to be more willing to suspend.... aid
operations.”561 However, a number of sources told SIGAR that beneficiaries also suffer
when aid donors intended for them is diverted somewhere else.562
Temporary aid suspensions are not the same as simply eliminating or significantly
reducing aid to an entire country context after a political estrangement—an action likely
to have far more negative consequences. Rather, these are deliberate, strategic decisions
meant to deter bad actors and ultimately protect a population.563 For example, in the
1980s, U.S. officials reported finding remarkably little diversion of food aid in Marxist
Ethiopia, because the Ethiopian government “knows aid shipments will be cut off at the
first sign of abuse.”564
According to internal USAID memos about the U.S. decision to partially suspend aid
to parts of Yemen controlled by the Houthis in 2020, the more suspensions can be
coordinated among major donors and the UN, the more impact they have in ensuring
that aid reaches the neediest.565

Afghans sit on food donations in the back of a pick-up before distributing to needy families in Nawa District,
Helmand Province, in September 2010. (Marine Corps photo by Sgt. Mark Fayloga)

62 | LESSONS FROM THE U.S. EXPERIENCE IN AFGHANISTAN CAN HELP INFORM FUTURE FOREIGN AID REFORM

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

Yemen: Example of an Aid Suspension That Worked
Aid suspensions have shown to be an effective strategy to stop aid diversion in real time
and to deter future aid diversion. In the late 2010s, the United States paused funding to
multiple programs in Houthi-controlled regions of Yemen, including $65 million in NGO
awards, in response to Houthi diversion and the group’s announcement that they were
imposing a new 2 percent tax on aid.566 The U.S. government, other donors, the UN, and
NGOs tried several strategies to address diversion, including stricter oversight through
third-party monitoring, biometric tracking for aid distribution, and diplomatic engagement
with Houthi leadership.567 Ultimately, Houthi authorities did not uphold their political
commitments and diversion continued.568
The essential nature of aid to these regions made it difficult to suspend, but the severe
interference into aid delivery was already contributing to the human suffering.569 WFP
third-party monitors began reporting major incidents of diversion in 2018. In response,
the agency suspended aid in 2019.570 Problems continued. In January 2020, a group
of international NGOs sent a letter to donors detailing continued interference and
diversion by the Houthis. In response to the letter, donors agreed to tell the Houthis
that this was unacceptable.571 The United States attempted to coordinate a joint aid
suspension with the UN, European Union, and other major donors, such as Germany.
U.S. efforts succeeded in rallying the donor community around a set of six shared
“red lines,” including removing the tax, striking some unacceptable clauses to required
agreements, instituting better oversight, and instituting such reforms as requiring
biometric registration for aid recipients. Donors also formed a technical monitoring
group on aid diversion.572 However, to the chagrin of U.S. officials, the UN ultimately
delegated decisions about whether to suspend programming to its individual agencies,
and other donors failed to join the United States in suspending aid.573 According to a
State Department memo about the failed attempt to achieve a broader aid suspension,
the UN’s Emergency Relief Coordinator’s “lack of leadership in coordinating this effort
weakens the leverage we would otherwise have with the Houthis.”574
The United States ultimately suspended aid to Houthi-controlled parts of Yemen in
March of 2020.575 This included all U.S. government funding for humanitarian aid, except
funds designated for human rights and demining, acute malnutrition, cholera treatment,
and limited food assistance.576 The U.S. government faced public pushback for the
suspension.577 However, when the suspension was lifted in March of 2021, aid workers
felt there had been “an improved environment” for previously impeded aid delivery,
including progress on the removal of unacceptable clauses to required agreements,
approval for travel, and access for program assessments.578 Aid suspensions have since
been used as leverage against Houthi-diversion on at least two other occasions, and by
February 2024, the U.S. government began rerouting all U.S. humanitarian assistance
to areas controlled by the Yemeni government through Aden and Mukalla ports.579 While
results of these aid suspensions have been imperfect, they are the best example of
attempts to “do the right thing” when managing the unchecked and harmful impacts of
aid diversion.580

AUGUST 2025 | 63

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

Aid suspensions in Ghor Province in 2023 by the U.S. government and United Nations
may not have been well coordinated. In mid-January of that year, the UN’s humanitarian
coordinator informed the governor of Ghor that food assistance operations in the province
would be halted due to “worrisome irregularities,” including the “systematic [collection]
of a huge percentage of humanitarian supplies and cash,” to finance a road construction
project.581 One NGO official SIGAR interviewed concurred that the provincial governor
had been trying to fund a road project.582 An Afghan investigative journalism outlet
found that UNICEF’s food distributions were paused a second time that year in April,
temporarily halting delivery to 40,000 needy families.583 Then, in May State Department
spokesman Matthew Miller announced a suspension of U.S food aid operations in parts
of the province. In his briefing, he noted that the World Food Programme had suspended
distribution in two districts in Ghazni province from January to April.584

Possible Alternatives to Cash Flights: Hawalas and Tankhaa
As a former U.S. Institute of Peace Afghanistan expert wrote in Lawfare, “UN cash
shipments—originally seen as a temporary expedient—are both costly and risky. William
Byrd described a layered system wherein “cash shipments incur substantial costs at
every stage of the process: conversion of bank funds into cash dollars in Europe, cost of
air shipment, security costs, administrative overheads and bank charges and so on.” The
shipment system is also fragile, and any security incident or other disruption that could
cause a pause would wreak havoc with the humanitarian system.585
Hawalas are a viable alternative, although they lack transparency. Most financial
transactions in Afghanistan are conducted through the hawala system, since roughly
85 percent of Afghans have no bank account.586 This concentration of financial activity in
the unregulated private sector is common in hostile contexts.587

Afghan National Defense and Security Forces and the NATO Resolute Support Mission provide aid and
assistance to the victims of floods in the eastern province of Parwan in August 2020. (NATO photo)

64 | LESSONS FROM THE U.S. EXPERIENCE IN AFGHANISTAN CAN HELP INFORM FUTURE FOREIGN AID REFORM

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

What Are Hawalas?
Hawala means “transfer” in Arabic, and the hawala system is a centuries-old remittance system
used around the world.588 Currency traders are also known as hawala dealers, or hawaladar.589
Treasury defines hawaladar as individual brokers within an informal money transmission network
(hawala system) that arrange for the transfer and receipt of funds or equivalent value and settle
their accounts through trade and cash.590
According to the Georgetown Security Studies Review, “Hawalas serve as a wire transfer
equivalent throughout Central and South Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa. Unlike
traditional banking systems, money does not move across auditable, electronic pathways; rather,
a complex network of human brokers transfer funds through telephone calls, faxes, and currency
exchanges, capable of delivery across the world within hours. The absence of legal contracts,
detailed records, and identification requirements eliminates the potential for a paper trail; this
cheap, fast system is free of government regulation and, in some states, [is] considered more
reliable than formal banking institutions.”591
Hawalas often offer more competitive rates than banks, and can usually complete a transaction
within one day, compared to a week or more for an international bank transfer.592 Other reasons
for their popularity are less innocent: The absence of a paper trail can facilitate tax evasion, money
laundering, and terrorist financing.593
With wire transfers into and out of Afghanistan suspended after the Taliban takeover in
the fall of 2021 and the Afghan economy nearing collapse, the aid sector was forced to
rely extensively on hawalas.594 One NGO official told SIGAR that although some donors
accepted this, others only did so reluctantly.595 Among U.S. agencies, attitudes toward
hawalas differ. One USAID official said implementing partners of some agencies rely on
hawalas, but officials at Treasury want to prevent their use.596
However, relying on Afghanistan’s formal banking sector carries its own risks. The
reputation of the country’s banking sector has yet to recover from the 2010 Kabul Bank
scandal, in which the bank’s leadership and a handful of political elites embezzled nearly
$1 billion via fraudulent loan schemes.597 The country director for an Afghan NGO told
an Afghan NGO forum, that, particularly in light of the fall 2021 freeze on international
transfers, hawalas are “the most resilient form of money transfer in Afghanistan.”598
An alternative mechanism for getting funding into the country, called Tankhaa, emerged almost
immediately after the Taliban takeover. Tankhaa is a partnership between 21 humanitarian
organizations and an Afghan company, the Qasemi Group of Companies (QGC), which imports
food, fuel, and agricultural products. International NGOs working in Afghanistan take out a
short-term loan in afghanis from QGC’s Kabul-based food division, and the international affiliates
of those NGOs repay the loans in dollars to the QGC’s offices in the United Arab Emirates. That
office uses the dollars to buy food imports needed by its Kabul-based food division; the local
NGOs use the afghanis from their short-term loans to pay salaries and other operating costs.599
“The system operates without a competent, credible, or capable financial regulator overseeing
the mechanism in Afghanistan, which may present additional illicit finance risks.”600

AUGUST 2025 | 65

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

FIGURE 3

Tankhaa: An Alternative Mechanism for Getting Money into Afghanistan

1

a Dubai Bank

2

An international NGO working in Afghanistan
deposits $1,000,000 in the Qasemi Group
of Companies’ Dubai bank account

International Market
PALM
OIL

WHEAT
FLOUR

TOBACCO

QCG buys $5 million in food

3

Border Crossing

WELCOME TO
AFGHANISTAN

QGC imports food
into Afghanistan

$1 = 70 AFN

5

a Kabul Bank

4

Chogorak Market
in Kabul
PALM
OIL

WHEAT
FLOUR

TOBACCO

QCG sells $5 million
in food at a profit

From its profits, QCG takes the equivalent
of $1m (70,000,000 afghanis) and
deposits it in Kabul bank account of iNGO

6

iNGO Office

iNGO uses 70,000,000 afghanis
to pay staff and other costs (rent,
electricity, fuel, etc.)

66 | LESSONS FROM THE U.S. EXPERIENCE IN AFGHANISTAN CAN HELP INFORM FUTURE FOREIGN AID REFORM

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

An Afghan businessman familiar with the Tankhaa mechanism told SIGAR that the
scheme keeps overhead costs low. He said that Tankhaa charges customers 3 to 5 percent,
depending on whether recipients are in Kabul or elsewhere in the country. He said that it
is currently operating at a relatively small scale of $3 to $4 million per month.601
Tankhaa could theoretically be expanded by including additional companies importing
goods into Afghanistan or remittances going into the country. However, if it the expansion
were sufficient to reduce or eliminate the need for the UN’s cash flights, it would come
with major drawbacks. Because the flights create significant demand for the afghani,
any reduction in cash flights would put downward pressure on the value of the afghani,
which would cause inflation.602 Because a significant portion of the food in Afghanistan is
imported—particularly wheat flour—inflation would drive up the price of this food staple
for millions of Afghans already experiencing emergency levels of food insecurity.603
QGC says it received guidance from the U.S. Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control
and the United Kingdom’s Office of Financial Sanctions Implementation that Tankhaa does
not fall under sanctions.604 However, that does not mean that it could not be misused. The
scheme converts afghanis held by QGC inside the country into dollars outside and could
be used to move the proceeds from illicit activities out of the country.605
The World Bank has proposed a mechanism similar to Tankhaa, called the Humanitarian
Exchange Facility, to replace the cash flights.606 So far, however, the Taliban have opposed
any mechanism which would reduce their access to dollars and the profit they can make
exchanging them for afghanis.607 According to an Afghan businessman in the banking
sector, any plans that involve bypassing the central bank would reduce the flow of dollars
into the country, devaluing the value of the afghani and driving up the price of food.608
SIGAR found that, while aid diversion is a challenge in both friendly and hostile
countries, it is much more problematic under regimes like the Taliban, because of the
way it tends to enrich and entrench them, undermining U.S. interests. The Taliban use
every means at their disposal, including force, to ensure that aid goes where they want
it to, as opposed to where donors intend. For example, the Taliban use their regulatory
power to authorize which NGOs may operate, and under what conditions. They block
and redirect aid to ensure that food goes to Pashtun communities and not to Hazara or
Tajik communities. They also refuse to allow NGOs to operate unless they hire Talibanaffiliated businesses, hire Taliban members, or partner with Taliban-owned NGOs.

AUGUST 2025 | 67

CHAPTER 6

CONCLUSION

S

IGAR found that the global system of delivering aid to people living under hostile
regimes, like the Taliban, is broken. The system is costly and overly complex,
involving multiple onion-like layers of UN agencies, NGOs, and subcontractors. Each
layer drives up costs, reducing the benefit to intended recipients like the Afghan people.
Each layer also creates new opportunities for malign actors to divert aid or otherwise
engage in corruption. The multitude of layers reduces overall transparency and makes it
difficult for aid to be adjusted or modified in response to changing needs or conditions.
The Taliban’s constant demand for payment greatly reduces the amount of aid that
actually reaches the population. One NGO official described it as “going down a
staircase, and every single step, there’s a tax.” An implementing partner estimated that
after all the layers of taxes, fees, bribery, and extortion, “maybe around 30 to 40 percent”
of donor funds reaches the population. According to the U.S. Institute of Peace, the
Taliban are likely to increasingly view the UN as a source of revenue.
According to ten SIGAR sources, who were interviewed individually and represent
a variety of backgrounds and perspectives, companies and NGOs seeking contracts
from the UN must pay kickbacks to UN officials to secure these awards. These
individuals included a current UN official, a former senior Afghan government official,
a businessman, an Afghan civil society activist, an implementing partner, and staff of
companies and NGOs with UN contracts. They described an environment in which

AUGUST 2025 | 69

Afghan children watch
U.S. Marines in their village
during a security patrol
in December 2011. (U.S.
Marine Corps photo by Cpl.
Reece Lodder)

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

corruption is pervasive. Some interviewees told SIGAR that UN officials sometimes
collude with Taliban officials to demand these payoffs, meaning that the Taliban are
benefiting from UN corruption.
The U.S. government outsources much of the responsibility for mitigating the risks of
diversion and corruption to its implementing partners. But aid is an industry like any
other, and implementing partners are often in fierce competition with each other over
U.S. funding. The U.S. government also puts pressure on its partners to deliver aid to
more people, faster, and in harder-to-reach areas. This incentivizes them to more quickly
agree to Taliban demands, in exchange for permission to do their jobs. When one aid
organization accedes to regime demands, it reduces the ability of the others to resist.
In the current system, aid organizations are incentivized to cover up or not report
diversion. Officially, donors maintain that none of their money is going to the Taliban. In
reality, the pressure to be viewed as credible in order to continue receiving the funding
necessary to operate can lead aid organizations to conceal how much of their aid is
diverted. Moreover, donors provide little support to the organizations that implement aid
programs and face diversion risks.
The U.S. government’s tendency to pass substantial amounts of its aid to countries
with hostile regimes through the UN may also be counterproductive. Because the UN
is large enough to make its own decisions about how it engages with hostile regimes,
the United States and other donors may find themselves funding UN agencies that are
out of alignment with their goals. A USAID official described the UN’s compliance with
the diversionary demands of one hostile regime (not named to protect the interviewee’s
identity) as “WFP, OCHA, and other UN bodies … actively working against U.S. foreign
policy objectives—and using a lot of U.S. government money to do it.”
Prior to the State Department’s decision to shut off most aid to Afghanistan in 2025,
the majority of that funding was humanitarian. This is often the case for aid provided
to people living under hostile regimes, because extreme poverty is increasingly
concentrated in these places. Humanitarian aid is intended to allow for a rapid, lifesaving response to emergencies. As a result, humanitarian aid is subject to fewer
U.S. laws and regulations than development aid, which is intended to build enduring
systems and structures over a longer-period. However, in recent decades, the
United States has tended to provide humanitarian aid for many years to places like
Afghanistan. What this means is that the United States often has the least oversight in
the places where it needs it the most.

70 | CONCLUSION

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

The United States stopped most aid to Afghanistan. However, it is likely that it will continue
to provide some form of assistance to people living in countries ruled by hostile regimes, like
Gaza. In our January 2022 Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, SIGAR presented
the following best practices for foreign assistance that are still relevant today:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Establish a clear purpose for the aid.
Insist that any organization receiving U.S. funding is fully transparent, so we know
where our money went and how it was used.
Set a tolerable level of risk and be ready to end an activity if that risk becomes too great.
Keep track of how money is used and regularly reassess to see if activities are
actually helping people.
Determine clear, relevant metrics that measure actual outcomes, not just how many
dollars were spent or how many people participated in some program.
If an activity is going poorly, make course corrections and be prepared to pull the plug.
Third-party monitors are necessary, but the U.S. government should be diligent in
evaluating them and their standards.
Adapt to the evolving situation on the ground, where one size does not fit all situations.
Seek smart opportunities to condition aid.
Look for activities that the recipients can eventually sustain without outside support.

RECOMMENDATIONS
To ensure that any future foreign assistance to Afghanistan—or other countries or territories
with similar conditions—is effective, SIGAR makes the following three recommendations:
1.

2.

3.

To ensure that aid benefits both taxpayers and beneficiaries and is not wasted by
the UN, the Secretary of State should ensure that U.S. agencies administered by the
Secretary—namely the Department of State, USAID, or former USAID entities—
involved with providing, administering, or auditing the aid have full access to UN
performance and financial reporting and the right to conduct unrestricted and
unannounced site visits and/or utilize third-party monitors for U.S.-funded projects.
This should apply to all types of aid including emergency and humanitarian aid
provided in response to a disaster or other crisis.
As shown in this report, aid passes through numerous UN agencies and NGOs that
each deduct administrative costs before it reaches beneficiaries. Therefore, the
Secretary of State should limit the number of organizations that aid passes through
before reaching beneficiaries. This may require regulatory, oversight, funding cycle,
procurement, and staffing reforms.
As part of the ongoing reorganization of the Department of State and reform of
foreign assistance, the Secretary of State should ensure that Department staff
administering aid receive training in risk management and the mitigation of aid
diversion—two critical functions for which State is ultimately responsible.

AUGUST 2025 | 71

APPENDICES

METHODOLOGY

O

ur lessons learned reports synthesize not only the body of work and expertise of SIGAR,
but also that of other oversight agencies, government entities, academic institutions,
independent scholars, and current and former officials with on-the-ground experience.
This report examines the challenges faced by the United States, other donors, the UN,
and NGOs in delivering aid to people living under the Taliban and other regimes that
many donors do not recognize, and which for purposes of this report we refer to as
“hostile.” Congress and USAID’s Office of Inspector General have repeatedly expressed
concerns about the risk of aid diversion in Afghanistan and similar contexts.
SIGAR conducts its lessons learned program under the authority of Public Law 110181 and the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended. This report was completed in
accordance with the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency’s
Quality Standards for Federal Offices of Inspector General (commonly referred to as
“the Blue Book”). These standards require that we carry out our work with integrity,
objectivity, and independence, and provide information that is factually accurate and
reliable. SIGAR’s lessons learned reports are broad in scope and based on a wide range
of source material. To achieve the goal of high quality and to ensure our reports are

AUGUST 2025 | 73

Private security contractors
protect the construction
of the Khost-Gardez road,
on March 30, 2010.
(USAID photo)

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

factually accurate and reliable, the reports are subject to extensive internal and external
review, including by relevant U.S. government agencies.
SIGAR derived this report’s definition of “hostile” from the definition of “politically
estranged” regimes in the Chatham House and New York University’s Center on
International Cooperation report entitled “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’
Settings.” To be considered hostile/politically estranged, a regime had to be sanctioned
by the United States and/or the UN and meet one or more of the following criteria:
• States in which the authorities have gained or retained power through
unconstitutional means, such as Afghanistan, Houthi-controlled territories of Yemen,
South Sudan, or Sudan.
• States in which there has been a contested election and in which a significant number
of donor states do not recognize the party claiming victory, or states in which they
prohibit interaction with the party claiming victory, such as Gaza and Syria under the
Assad regime.
In these contexts, ruptured political relations create practical and legal challenges for
development partnerships, diplomatic representation is often reduced or withdrawn,
and a significant portion of aid tends to be humanitarian and flows through multilateral
organizations such as the UN and the World Bank.
This report discusses the challenges faced by donors, the UN, and NGOs in delivering
aid to Taliban-controlled Afghanistan, as well as to several comparison countries. These
countries were selected because they:
• Appeared in the list of top 20 recipients of net official development assistance in
fiscal year 2021;
• Are ruled in part or in whole by regimes that are politically estranged from the United
States and often other major Western donors;
• Are currently experiencing or have recently experienced conflict; and
• Could be studied based not only on prevailing documentary evidence, but also on the
Lessons Learned Program’s preexisting network of contacts.
Using the Chatham House criteria, SIGAR concluded that 8 of the top 20 countries
and territories receiving aid from all donors in fiscal year 2021 were hostile/politically
estranged: Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, South Sudan,
Sudan, Syria, the Gaza Strip, and Yemen. We chose not to focus on Ethiopia, because
the outbreak of the Tigray War was so recent when work on this report started that
there was little open-source analysis on which to base a literature review compared
to other countries. We chose not to focus on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
because, compared to the other contexts, the Lessons Learned Program team did
not have sufficient contacts there with which to jump-start the interviewing process.
Another factor in limiting the comparison contexts was the need to keep the number
manageable. The five comparison contexts referenced in this report are: the Gaza Strip,
South Sudan, Sudan, Syria before the fall of the Assad regime in 2024, and Houthicontrolled territories of Yemen.
74 | APPENDICES

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

This report drew upon a wide array of sources including publicly available documents,
such as U.S. government reports by USAID, State, and SIGAR; congressional testimony;
public statements and press comments by U.S. government officials; U.S. regulations;
reports by other entities including the UN, the World Bank, the European Union,
the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands; and various relevant think tank reports,
among others. SIGAR also relies on its access to material that is not publicly available,
including thousands of documents provided by U.S. government agencies, from
strategies and unclassified cables to program reports, internal memos, and emails.
The report also draws heavily on nearly 90 interviews with U.S. government and
other donor officials, NGO officials, experts on Afghanistan and the comparison
countries, and private sector individuals working in aid delivery and implementation
in Afghanistan. Interviews were directly requested by SIGAR with individuals whose
work was relevant to the aims of the report or who work, or have previously worked,
for agencies and NGOs associated with aid delivery and assistance in Afghanistan.
Additionally, snowball (also known as chain-referral) sampling was used, in which each
interviewee recommended other knowledgeable sources to interview. This approach
has two advantages. First, the experts identified by other experts are more likely to be
well-versed in our research topic. Second, in our team’s experience, these people are
more likely to agree to an interview. We recognize the risk that snowball sampling may
introduce bias into our pool of interviewees. Therefore, we also approached potential
interviewees through LinkedIn, based on their experience and expertise.
Conducting interviews on a politically sensitive topic such as aid diversion requires
safeguards to both protect interviewees and validate the information provided.
Confidentiality and anonymity were maintained by referring to interviewees as “donor
official,” “an implementing partner,” “NGO official,” or the like when this was requested
by interviewees. The validity of interviewees was checked by cross-referencing
individuals’ identities with social media, mutual contacts, and the websites of
organizations with whom interviewees are employed.
All participants bring personal motivations and biases to interviews, as do their employing
organizations. In fact, several organizations have sought to prevent their staff from being
interviewed by SIGAR or tried to prevent interviews from being conducted on a not-forattribution basis, which is essential to permit interviewees to speak frankly and without
risks to their career or safety. To paint as accurate a picture of aid diversion as possible,
the SIGAR team continually assessed the validity of interviewee accounts by comparing
them with one another, as well as to public and nonpublic documentary evidence.
This report would not be possible without the willingness of interviewees to share their
experience, knowledge, and wisdom with the SIGAR team. Their interviews are used extensively
in this report and provide insights into the operation of aid diversion practices in Afghanistan
unobtainable by an analysis of publicly available documents alone. SIGAR is especially indebted
to the Afghans still in Afghanistan who assumed great risk to expose corruption and diversion
and to fight for a future in which more aid reaches the most vulnerable.

AUGUST 2025 | 75

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

APPENDIX II: COMMENTS FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE

76 | APPENDICES

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

AUGUST 2025 | 77

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

78 | APPENDICES

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

AUGUST 2025 | 79

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

SIGAR’s Response to Comments from the Department of State
SIGAR Comment 1: SIGAR incorporated State’s suggested edits.
SIGAR Comment 2: State’s preferred language for Recommendation 3 reflects the view
that ensuring adequate monitoring and risk management of U.S.-funded projects is a
responsibility shared between State and implementing organizations. Although SIGAR
agrees that both State and its implementers bear responsibility for mitigating diversion
risk, it disagrees that responsibility should be fully “shared.” Accordingly, the final
version of Recommendation 3 reflects SIGAR’s view that State is ultimately responsible
for the efficacy of its assistance programs.

80 | APPENDICES

A BROKEN AID SYSTEM: DELIVERING U.S. ASSISTANCE TO TALIBAN-CONTROLLED AFGHANISTAN

APPENDIX III: ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviation

Meaning

CRS

U.S. Congressional Research Service

CSIS

Center for Strategic and International Studies

GDI

General Directorate of Intelligence

IARCSC

Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission

IASC

UN Inter-Agency Standing Committee

IMF

International Monetary Fund

MERIP

Middle East Research and Information Project

MOU

Memorandum of understanding

NGO

Non-governmental organization

NICRA

Negotiated international cost rate agreement

NRC

Norwegian Refugee Council

OCHA

UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

OFAC

Office of Foreign Assets Control (U.S. Treasury)

QGC

Qasemi Group of Companies

RSF

Rapid Support Forces

SSP

South Sudanese pounds

UNDP

UN Development Programme

USAID OIG

U.S. Agency for International Development Office of Inspector General

WFP

World Food Programme

AUGUST 2025 | 81

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

ENDNOTES
1

The U.S. cut aid to Afghanistan in two tranches: almost all
aid was cut in April 2025 and the two remaining education
programs ended in June 2025. This $3.8 billion figure
represents disbursed funds. USAID official, response to
SIGAR datacall, June 13, 2025; SIGAR, Quarterly Report to
the United States Congress, April 30, 2025, p. i.
2		SIGAR, Why the Afghan Government Collapsed, SIGAR
23-05-IP, November 15, 2022, pp. 30, 32, 33; SIGAR,
Corruption in Conflict: Lessons from the U.S. Experience
in Afghanistan, SIGAR 16-58-LL, September 1, 2016, pp. ii,
4, 6, 18-20.
3		SIGAR, Corruption in Conflict: Lessons from the U.S.
Experience in Afghanistan, SIGAR 16-58 LL, September
2016, pp. 4, 6, 18-19, 56-57; SIGAR, Elections: Lessons from
the U.S. Experience in Afghanistan, February 2021, SIGAR
21-16-LL, p. 97; SIGAR, Stabilization: Lessons from the U.S.
Experience in Afghanistan, SIGAR 18-48-LL, May 2018, p.
64; SIGAR, The Risk of Doing the Wrong Thing Perfectly:
Monitoring and Evaluation of Reconstruction Contracting
in Afghanistan, SIGAR 21-41 LL, July 2021, p. 13.
4		 World Bank Group, “World Bank Group Strategy for
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 2020–2025,” February 26,
2020, p. 2; Sarah Cliff, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina, and
Leah Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’
Settings,” Chatham House International Security Programme
and New York University’s Center for International
Cooperation, April 2023, p. 4.
5		 According to the World Bank, approximately two-thirds
of the world’s extreme poor will be living in “fragile and
conflict-affected contexts by 2030. Half of the population
in these places also live under regimes that many donors
consider hostile, according to a Chatham House and New
York University’s Center for International Cooperation
analysis of World Bank data. Rather than using the
term “hostile,” the report uses the phrase “politically
estranged.” “Politically estranged” is a term used to describe
regimes that are not recognized by donors. In order to
be considered politically estranged, a regime had to be
facing comprehensive sanctions by the United States and/
or the UN and meet one or more of the following criteria:
(1) States in which the authorities have gained or retained
power through unconstitutional means, such as Afghanistan,
Houthi-controlled territories of Yemen, or Sudan; (2) States
in which there has been a contested election and in which a
significant number of donor states do not recognize the party
claiming victory or states in which they prohibit interaction
with the party claiming victory, such as Gaza and Syria under
the Assad regime. World Bank Group, “World Bank Group
Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 2020–2025,”
February 26, 2020, p. 2; Sarah Cliff, Renata Dwan, Betty
Wainaina, and Leah Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically
Estranged’ Settings,” Chatham House International
Security Programme and New York University’s Center for
International Cooperation, April 2023, p. 5.
6		 Secretary of State Marco Rubio Before the House
Committee on Foreign Affairs on the FY26 Department of
State Budget Request, Department of State website: https://
www.state.gov/secretary-of-state-marco-rubio-before-the-

82 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

house-committee-on-foreign-affairs-on-the-fy26-departmentof-state-budget-request/ (accessed June 25, 2025).
7		 For example, the Dutch government’s foreign policy strategy
from 2018 to 2022 emphasized that addressing terrorist
threats and irregular migration were among the country’s
top priorities in fragile and conflict-affected contexts.
Likewise, the United Kingdom lists mitigating the threat
of terrorism and stemming refugee flows as its top two
goals in Afghanistan. Policy and Operations Evaluations
Department (IOB), “IOB Evaluation Inconvenient Realities:
An evaluation of Dutch contributions to stability, security
and rule of law in fragile and conflict-affected contexts,”
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, August 2023,
p. 15; United Kingdom Commission for Aid Impact, “UK aid
to Afghanistan Information note,” May 2023, p. 8.
8		 World Bank Group, “World Bank Group Strategy for
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 2020–2025,” February 26,
2020, p. viii, 27.
9		 UN High Commission for Refugees website: https://www.
unhcr.org/refugee-statistics/data-summaries (accessed April
9, 2025); Sarah Cliff, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina, and Leah
Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,”
Chatham House International Security Programme and
New York University’s Center for International Cooperation,
April 2023, p. 7; Hardin Lang, “Fit for Purpose: Getting
Humanitarian Aid Right in Afghanistan One Year after the
Taliban Takeover,” Refugees International, August 2022, p. 9.
10		 As of 2017, the average length of refugee displacement was
26 years. Marina Caparini and Anders Reagan, “Connecting
the dots on the triple nexus,” Stockholm Peace and Security
Institute, November 29, 2019.
11		 According to a 2018 USAID inspector general’s report:
“The nonpermissive areas where USAID operates around
the world create a perfect storm for bad actors to take
advantage of…and divert foreign assistance funds and aid
from the millions of people who need it most.” The office
issued an alert in September 2021 warning that Taliban
interference poses significant challenges and documenting
two instances in which the regime diverted or co-opted
U.S.-funded aid. At least two of the inspector general’s
annual “Top Management Challenges” reports issued since
August 2021 have contained concerns about Afghanistan.
Between 2021 and 2023, the inspector general’s office also
issued reports warning of risks to humanitarian aid in
Gaza, Syria under the Assad regime, and Yemen. Members
of the House Foreign Affairs Committee asked similar
questions about oversight of aid to Afghanistan in hearings
in May 2023 and November 2023. “House Foreign Affairs
Committee Holds Hearing on State of American Influence
in 2023,” Congressional Quarterly, transcript, May 17,
2023, electronic p. 4; Rep. Michael McCaul, “Examining the
Biden Administration’s Afghanistan Policy Since the U.S.
Withdrawal,” remarks before the House Foreign Affairs
Committee, November 14, 2023, pp. 24, 36, 42-44, 46-47,
53; USAID Office of Inspector General, “Top Management
Challenges Facing USAID in Fiscal Year 2022,”, n.d., p. 2;
USAID Office of Inspector General, “Situational Alert on
Future Aid to Afghanistan,” September 14, 2021; USAID,
“Insufficient Oversight of Public International Organizations
Puts U.S. Foreign Assistance Programs at Risk,” AR-8-00018-003-P, Office of the Inspector General, September 5, 2018,
p. 21; USAID, “Top Management Challenges Facing USAID
in Fiscal Year 2022,” Office of the Inspector General, n.d., p.
2; USAID, “Top Management Challenges Facing USAID in

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

Fiscal Year 2023,” Office of the Inspector General, n.d., p.
14; USAID, “Responsibility to Identify and Report Potential
Diversion of U.S Humanitarian Aid to Hamas and Other
Foreign Terrorist Organizations,” Office of the Inspector
General, November 2023, p. 1; USAID, “Weaknesses in
Oversight of USAID’s Syria Response Point To the Need
for Enhanced Management of Fraud Risks in Humanitarian
Assistance,” AR-8-000-21-001-P, Office of the Inspector
General, March 4, 2021, p. 4; USAID Office of Inspector
General, “Humanitarian Assistance in Yemen: Opportunities
Exist for USAID to Further Strengthen Its Risk Management
Process,” August 23, 2022, p. 11.
12 USAID Office of Inspector General, “Situational Alert on
Future Aid to Afghanistan,” September 14, 2021.
13		 James E. Risch, ranking member, and Robert Menendez,
chairman, Senate Foreign Relations Committee; Michael T.
McCaul, ranking member, and Gregory W. Meeks, chairman,
House Foreign Affairs Committee, letter to President Biden,
January 11, 2022, p. 2.
14		 Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time for Change: The
Normalization of Corruption and Diversion in the Humanitarian
Sector,” Centre on Armed Groups, April 17, 2024, p. 2.
15		 This calculation reflects disbursements. SIGAR, Quarterly
Report to the United States Congress, January 30, 2025, p. 103.
16		 “Follow the Money: U.S. Global Development Spending,”
UnLock Aid website: https://www.unlockaid.org/followthe-money (accessed January 21, 2025); Transcript of
“Where does foreign aid go and does it make an impact?,”
Public Broadcasting Service website: https://www.pbs.org/
newshour/show/where-does-u-s-foreign-aid-go-and-does-itmake-an-impact-2 (accessed January 17, 2025).
17		 Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for
a Candid Conversation?”, Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023, p. 25; Norwegian Refugee Council,
“Weathering the Storm: Why and how development financing
actors should stay engaged during political crises,” February
2024, pp. 18, 20; Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time for
Change: The Normalization of Corruption and Diversion in
the Humanitarian Sector,” Centre on Armed Groups, April
17, 2024, p. 16; George Ingram, “Locally driven development:
Overcoming the obstacles,” Center for Sustainable
Development at Brookings, Brookings Global Working Paper
#173, May 2022, p. 8; Patrick Fine, “USAID Can’t Go It Alone
on Localization,” Brookings, February 5, 2024.
18		 UN OCHA, “Afghanistan Humanitarian Fund 2023 Annual
Report,” undated, p. 6.
19		 According to a report by NYU’s Center on International
Cooperation, it is a conflict of interest for the United
Nations Development Programme to administer the body
that awards funding for the Area Based Approach to
Development Emergency Initiatives (ABADEI) program and
give some of that funding to itself. Paul Fishstein and Aman
Farahi, “The World’s Humanitarian, Economic, and Political
Engagement with the Taliban,” New York University Center
on International Cooperation, January 2023, p. 29.
20		 These administrative costs are also known as overhead
costs, indirect costs, project support costs, or operations
costs. According to Congressional Research Service,
“Indirect costs” include an implementing partner’s central
office expenses, including management and administrative
labor wages, fringe benefits such as annual leave, office
rent for the central office (whereas project office rents
are directly allocable to the activity), and accounting
software, among other costs. Congressional Research

Service, “Foreign Assistance: Where Does the Money Go?,”
R48150, August 8, 2024, p. 19; SIGAR, Public International
Organizations in Afghanistan: State and USAID
Agreements with PIOs Need Strengthening to Ensure U.S.
Funds are Not Diverted to Terrorist Group, SIGAR 25-16AR, March 10, 2025, p. 5; Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion
in Afghanistan: Is it time for a Candid Conversation?,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, September 2023, p. 25; Paul
Fishstein and Aman Farahi, “The World’s Humanitarian,
Economic, and Political Engagement with the Taliban,” NYU
Center on International Cooperation, January 2023, p. 30.
21 (Since January 1, 2017, the World Bank has charged 4
percent on most grant funds, but 17 percent on certain expenses, like consultant services.) State official, response to
SIGAR datacall, July 11, 2025. SIGAR, Public International
Organizations in Afghanistan: State and USAID
Agreements with PIOs Need Strengthening to Ensure U.S.
Funds are Not Diverted to Terrorist Group, SIGAR 25-16AR, March 10, 2025, p. 6.
22		 Paul Fishstein and Aman Farahi, “The World’s Humanitarian,
Economic, and Political Engagement with the Taliban,” NYU
Center on International Cooperation, January 2023, p. 30.
23		 Congressional Research Service, “Foreign Assistance: Where
Does the Money Go?,” R48150, August 8, 2024, p. 19.
24		 Congressional Research Service, “Foreign Assistance: Where
Does the Money Go?,” R48150, August 8, 2024, p. 19.
25		 Steve Gloyd, Phantom Aid: Money allocated to countries
that ends up funding INGOs,” University of Washington
School of Public Health website: https://depts.washington.
edu/globalhealthjustice/what-is-the-problem-withinternational-aid/ (accessed January 17, 2025).
26		 Patrick Fine, “USAID Can’t Go It Alone on Localization,”
Brookings, February 5, 2024.
27		 George Ingram, “Locally driven development: Overcoming the
obstacles,” Center for Sustainable Development at Brookings,
Brookings Global Working Paper #173, May 2022, p. 8.
28		 Since Administrator Power’s announcement and subsequent
efforts in increasing the percentage of assistance provided
directly to local partners, the number increased from 9.6% in
2023 to 11.2% in 2024, according to a Devex article released
in January 2025.” USAID/BHA, response to SIGAR vetting,
June 24, 2025.
29		 Patrick Fine, “USAID Can’t Go It Alone on Localization,”
Brookings, February 5, 2024.
30		 Transcript of “Where does foreign aid go and does it make
an impact?,” Public Broadcasting Service website: https://
www.pbs.org/newshour/show/where-does-u-s-foreign-aid-goand-does-it-make-an-impact-2 (accessed January 17, 2025);
George Ingram, “Locally-Driven Development: Overcoming
the Obstacles,” Brookings, May 2022, p. 5.
31		 Transcript of “Where does foreign aid go and does it make
an impact?,” Public Broadcasting Service website: https://
www.pbs.org/newshour/show/where-does-u-s-foreign-aid-goand-does-it-make-an-impact-2 (accessed January 17, 2025).
32		 Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for
a Candid Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023, p. 28.
33		 Kevin Savage, Lorenzo Delesgues, Ellen Mart, and Gul Pacha
Ulfat, “Corruption perceptions and risks in humanitarian
assistance: an Afghanistan case study,” Overseas Development
Group and Integrity Watch Afghanistan, July 2007, p. 11.
34		 Stig Jarle Hansen, Inger Kristine Sørvig, N.
Shanmugaratnam, and Darley Kjosavik, “Conflict,
Corruption, Perception, Remedies: The Role of the United

AUGUST 2025 | 83

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

Nations in War Economies,” Noragric Working Paper no. 47,
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, August 2012, p. 6.
35		 Former USAID Kabul Mission Director Patrick Fine
examined this problem in a report for Brookings: Patrick
Fine, “USAID Can’t Go It Alone on Localization,” Brookings,
February 5, 2024.
36		 According to a report by the Centre on Armed Groups, one
reason that reimbursement rates are higher for UN agencies
and international NGOs than they are for local NGOs is
that the former category charges two layers of overhead
costs: administrative costs from their foreign headquarters
staff and a second for local administration. Local NGOs are
forced to cover all administrative costs through a single
overhead percentage. In addition, the report found that
the insufficiency of payments to local NGOs often forces
their staff to work unpaid and forces the organizations to
borrow money from local businesspeople during difficult
times. Katherine Haver and William Carter, “What it
Takes: Principled pragmatism to enable access and quality
humanitarian aid in insecure environments,” November
2016, p. 11; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023;
Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for
a Candid Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023, pp. 23, 25; NGO official, SIGAR interview,
March 30, 2023.
37		 Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time for Change: The
Normalization of Corruption and Diversion in the Humanitarian
Sector,” Centre on Armed Groups, April 17, 2024, p. 2.
38		 Writing for the Afghanistan Analysts Network, Ashley
Jackson has called for donors to “work more intelligently
and more strategically.” Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion
in Afghanistan: Is it time for a Candid Conversation?,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, September 2023, p. 30;
implementing partner, SIGAR interview, April 27, 2023;
Natasha Hall, “Rescuing Aid in Syria,” Center for Strategic
and International Studies, February 2022, p. 21; United
Kingdom Department for International Development,
“Humanitarian Assistance and Conflict: Findings from an
Internal DFID Conflict Sensitivity Review,” undated, p. 2.
39		 Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for
a Candid Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023, p. 30.
40		 Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time for Change:
The Normalization of Corruption and Diversion in the
Humanitarian Sector,” Centre on Armed Groups, April 17,
2024, p. 25; United Kingdom Department for International
Development, “Humanitarian Assistance and Conflict:
Findings from an Internal DFID Conflict Sensitivity Review,”
undated, p. 2.
41		 “Afghanistan: Working under the ITA’s evolving NGO
regulations,” ACAPS July 31, 2023, p. 10.
42		 According to the Conflict Sensitivity Research Facility,
a body that promotes aid effectiveness in South Sudan,
penalties include termination of funding, being barred from
bidding for future work, investigations, and reputational
risk.” Similarly, a UN official told SIGAR that implementing
partners don’t report diversion because they are rightfully
afraid of retaliation. “They don’t want to shoot themselves
in the foot.” Audrey Bottjen, “CSRF Policy Brief: When
Policies Backfire,” Conflict Sensitive Resource Facility,
April 2024, p. 3; UN official, SIGAR interview, July 26, 2023;
Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for
a Candid Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023, p. 28; International Crisis Group, “Taliban

84 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

Restrictions on Women’s Rights Deepen Afghanistan’s
Crisis,” February 23, 2023, p. 10; Kevin Haidary, SIGAR
Interview, March 9, 2023.
43		 While the Taliban continue to allow terrorist organizations
like al-Qaeda to find safe haven in Afghanistan and to
provide them with funding and weapons, there are some
signs that they are seeking to moderate their actions.
According to the United States Institute of Peace, the
Taliban have discouraged their own fighters from joining
foreign jihadist groups and have cracked down on ISIS-K.
Asfandyar Mir, “Two Years Under the Taliban: Is Afghanistan
a Terrorist Safe Haven Again?,” United States Institute
of Peace, August 15, 2023, pp. 2-3; Roxanna Shapour,
“Donors’ Dilemma: How to provide aid to a country whose
government you do not recognize,” Afghanistan Analysts
Network, July 5, 2022; Hardin Lang, “Fit for Purpose: Getting
Humanitarian Aid Right in Afghanistan One Year After the
Taliban Takeover,” Refugees International, August 2022, p. 9.
44		 Paul Fishstein, “Humanitarian Assistance in Afghanistan:
What’s Next,” New York University Center for International
Cooperation, December 21, 2021.
45		 European Commission, “Aid Diversion,” DGEcho website:
https://www.dgecho-partners-helpdesk.eu/ngo/actionsimplementation/aid-diversion (accessed August 15, 2024).
46		 As of April 2024, the UN Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs noted that there was no common
definition for diversion. In Afghanistan, it told other UN
agencies to focus on four primary risks: post-distribution
diversion (often efforts by local Taliban or community
leaders to redistribute aid to beneficiaries of their choosing);
corruption (including fraud, bribery, and kickbacks);
embedded diversion via charges such as security payments,
taxes, tolls, or fees; and interference (such as attempts
to influence beneficiary selection and/or demands to
participate in procurement or recruitment). U.S. Office
Afghanistan Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan: Guarding the
Guardians - UN Agencies Report Lessons Learned Mitigating
Taliban Aid Interference,” AAU 114 cable, April 4, 2024, p.
4; USAID, response to SIGAR data call, September 27, 2023;
U.S. Office Afghanistan Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan:
Guarding the Guardians - UN Agencies Report Lessons
Learned Mitigating Taliban Aid Interference,” AAU 114
cable, April 4, 2024, p. 4.
47		 USAID, response to SIGAR data call, December 15, 2023.
48		 UN General Assembly, “General Assembly Resolution 46/182
which led to the creation of the Department of Humanitarian
Affairs,” December 19, 1991, electronic p. 3.
49		 Sarah Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainana, and Leah
Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,”
Chatham House and New York University’s Center for
International Cooperation, April 2023, p. 7; Paul Fishstein
and Aman Farahi, “The World’s Humanitarian, Economic,
and Political Engagement with the Taliban,” NYU Center on
International Cooperation, January 2023, pp. 3, 10; Ashley
Jackson, Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for a Candid
Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network, September
2023, p. 15.
50		 Sean Healy and Andrew Cunningham, “The Friction of
Practice: Reflecting on the Médicins sans Frontières
Experience with ‘Authoritarian Regimes,’” in Authoritarian
Practices and Humanitarian Negotiations, ed. Andrew J.
Cunningham, (Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2024), p. 17.

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

51		 Sabawoon Samim and Ashley Jackson, “Taleban Perceptions
of Aid: Conspiracy, Corruption, and Miscommunication,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, July 2023, p. 24.
52		 Former UN official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023.
53		 Donor official, SIGAR interview, September 12, 2023.
54		 Antonio Donini “Local Perceptions of Assistance to
Afghanistan,” International Peacekeeping, 14:1, January
2007, pp. 162, 165-166; ACAPS, “Working Under the ITA’s
Evolving NGO Regulations, July 31, 2023,” p. 7; Ashley
Jackson, “Taleban Perceptions of Aid: Conspiracy,
Corruption and Miscommunication,” Afghanistan Analysts
Network, July 2023, pp. 4-6, 25.
55		 A November 2023 independent report commissioned by
the UN Security Council agreed with this Taliban criticism,
recommending that donors work toward resuming technical
assistance to the Afghan government as a means of reducing
the need to bypass the Taliban systems and making aid
cheaper and more sustainable. “Letter dated 8 November 2023
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, November 9, 2023,” UN Security Council, p.
8; Sabawoon Samim and Ashley Jackson, “Taleban Perceptions
of Aid: Conspiracy, Corruption, and Miscommunication,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, July 2023, p. 5.
56		 U.S. Army and Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field
Manual, FM 3-24, December 2006, pp. 41, 43, 44, 189.
57		 U.S. Army and Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field
Manual, FM 3-24, December 2006, p. 192.
58		 Sabawoon Samim and Ashley Jackson, “Taleban Perceptions
of Aid: Conspiracy, Corruption, and Miscommunication,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, July 2023, p. 7.
59		 United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy
Analysis—Afghanistan,” United States Institute of Peace,
produced on behalf of USAID, May 2023, p. 33.
60		 SIGAR, Why the Afghan Government Collapsed, SIGAR 2305-IP, November 2022, pp. 25, 43.
61		 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023.
62		 State, response to SIGAR data call, September 15, 2023.
63		 “A Conversation with Thomas West in the Context of
Afghanistan One Year Later,” Center for Strategic and
International Studies, event transcript: https://www.csis.org/
analysis/conversation-thomas-west-context-afghanistan-oneyear-later, September 28, 2022.
64		 State press briefing, January 23, 2023.
65		 “House Foreign Affairs Committee Holds Hearing on State
of American Influence in 2023,” Congressional Quarterly
transcript, May 11, 2021.
66		 USAID Office of Inspector General, “Situational Alert on the
Future of Aid to Afghanistan,” September 14, 2021, p. 2.
67		 USAID, response to SIGAR data call, September 15, 2023;
USAID, response to SIGAR data call, May 13, 2023.
68		 U.S. Office Afghanistan Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan
Affairs Unit: Notes from the Field, October 13, 2022,” AAU
250 cable, October 14, 2022, p. 3; U.S. Office Afghanistan
Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan: Guarding the Guardians UN Agencies Report Lessons Learned Mitigating Taliban Aid
Interference,” AAU 114 cable, April 4, 2024, pp. 3, 4.
69		 State, Press Briefing by Spokesman Matthew Miller, May 23,
2024.
70		 SIGAR, U.S. Funds Benefitting the Taliban-Controlled
Government: Implementing Partners Paid at Least $10.9
Million and Were Pressured to Divert Assistance, SIGAR
24-22-AR, May 20, 2023, electronic pp. 1, 2.

71		 Sean Healy and Andrew Cunningham, “The Friction of
Practice – Reflecting on the Médecins sans Frontières
Experience with ‘Authoritarian Regimes,” Authoritarian
Practices and Humanitarian Negotiations, ed. Andrew
Cunningham, (Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2024), p. 18.
72		 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, October 19, 2023; civil society activist,
SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 6, 2023; Kevin Haidary, chairman of the
World Hazara Council, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023;
Natasha Hall, “Rescuing Aid in Syria,” Center for Strategic
and International Studies, February 2022, p. 36; UN official,
SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; UN official, email to SIGAR,
April 14, 2023; Jon Alterman, “Aid and Conflict: Pitfalls in
Yemen,” Center for Strategic and International Studies,
August 2018, p. 3.
73		 Paul Harvey, Abby Stoddard, Monica Czwarno, Meriah-Jo
Breckenridge, Mariana Duque-Diez, “Humanitarian Access
SCORE Report: Sudan,” Humanitarian Outcomes, produced
on behalf of USAID, December 2023, p. 12.
74		 Asher Orkarby, “Benefiting from the Misery of Others:
Humanitarian Aid in Yemen,” Middle East Research and
Information Project, May 26, 2021, electronic p. 2.
75		 Asher Orkarby, “Benefiting from the Misery of Others:
Humanitarian Aid in Yemen,” Middle East Research and
Information Project, May 26, 2021, electronic p. 6.
76		 For example, in 2010 a UN Security Council report about
Somalia found that World Food Programme transportation
contracts were “greatest single source of revenue” in the
country. UN Security Council, “Letter dated 10 March 2010
from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed to the President
of the Security Council,” March 10, 2010, p. 7. A UN official
explained to SIGAR that the severity of interference into and
diversion of aid is dependent on the relative size of the nonaid sector. The larger the aid sector compared to the non-aid
sector of the economy, the more that powerbrokers will
focus on capturing aid. UN official, SIGAR interview, March
22, 2023; Asher Orkarby, “Benefitting from the Misery of
Others: Humanitarian Aid in Yemen,” Middle East Research
and Information Project, May 26, 2021.
77		 Asher Orkaby of the Middle East Research and Information
Project has argued that “the unchecked dumping of large
quantities of imported food can cripple local farmers,
leading to a vicious cycle of impoverishment.” In the
same article, he argued that donor policies in the 1970s
incentivized a shift in the Yemeni agriculture sector “from
planting food staples to more lucrative cash crops” that
accelerated the country’s conflict-driven food crisis.
Asher Orkaby, “Benefitting from the Misery of Others:
Humanitarian Aid in Yemen,” Middle East Information and
Research Project, May 26, 2021; Interagency Humanitarian
Evaluation Steering Group, “Inter-Agency Humanitarian
Evaluation of the Yemen Crisis, July 14, 2022, p. 71.
78		 Sabawoon Samim and Ashley Jackson, “Taleban Perceptions
of Aid: Conspiracy, Corruption, and Miscommunication,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, July 2023, p. 6; United
States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy Analysis—
Afghanistan,” United States Institute of Peace for USAID,
May 2023, p. 34.
79		 Sabawoon Samim and Ashley Jackson, “Taleban Perceptions
of Aid: Conspiracy, Corruption, and Miscommunication,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, July 2023, p. 9; NGO official,

AUGUST 2025 | 85

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023; Implementing partner
director, SIGAR interview, February 16, 2024.
80		 By 2017, researcher Ashley Jackson found that “many
provincial or district-level government health or education
officials interviewed said they were in direct contact with
their Taliban counterparts.” In some areas, these deals
were formalized in writing. Ashley Jackson, “Life under
the Taliban shadow government,” Overseas Development
Institute, June 20, 2018, p. 5.
81		 USAID, “Afghanistan–Complex Emergency,” Humanitarian
Update #112, April 12, 2024, p. 1; U.S. Office Afghanistan
Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan: Notes from the Field - April
1, 2024,” AAU cable 108, April 1, 2024, pp. 4-5; Independent
Commission for Aid Impact, “UK Humanitarian Aid to
Afghanistan,” July 2024, p. 4.
82		 USAID, response to SIGAR data call, October 2023.
83		 United Nations, “Security Council Emphasizes That Punitive
Restrictions on Women’s Rights, Escalating Hunger,
Insecurity Taking Devastating Toll in Afghanistan,” press
release, March 8, 2023.
84		 NGO official, SIGAR interview, April 3, 2023.
85		 Afghanistan expert Ashley Jackson has written that, under
the previous government, the Taliban claimed that they were
protecting Afghan women against the desecration of their
honor amidst changing roles in society to support their case
for war. Ashley Jackson, Negotiating Survival: CivilianInsurgent Relations in Afghanistan, (Hurst Publishers,
2021), p. 111; Larry Goodson, “Anti-Modernist Islam:
Understanding Taliban Treatment of Women in Afghanistan,”
July 15, 2002, pp. 4, 8.
86		 Human Rights Watch “You Have no Right to Complain:
Education, Social Restrictions and Justice in TalibanHeld Afghanistan,” June 30, 2020, p. 5; Ashley Jackson,
Negotiating Survival: Civilian-Insurgent Relations in
Afghanistan, (Hurst Publishers, 2021), p. 111.
87		 Speaking to New Lines magazine, a young Taliban fighter in
Bamiyan made a similar point. He described the provincial
governor’s compromises with the primarily Hazara
population on social freedoms as “ideological betrayal.” A
senior Taliban official in the province went further, fearing
it would “destroy our mujahedeen.” Fazelminallah Qazizai,
“In Bamiyan, The Taliban Has to Walk a Perilous Tightrope,”
New Lines, December 12, 2022; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, October 19, 2023.
88		 United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy
Analysis—Afghanistan,” United States Institute of Peace,
produced on behalf of USAID, May 2023, p. 33.
89		 Afghanistan: Humanitarian Needs Massive As UN Agencies
and Donors Mull Basic Needs Transition and Technical
Assistance to Taliban-Controlled Ministries,” April 3, 2024, p 5.
90		 Overall aid dropped to less than half what it was before the
Taliban takeover by 2023, and aid from the European Union
fell by around the same amount between 2022 and 2023. As
of January 2024, the United Kingdom also expected to cut its
aid to Afghanistan by half between the 2021/2022 fiscal year
and the 2024/2025 fiscal year. International Crisis Group,
“Toward a Self-sufficient Afghanistan,” January 30, 2024,
p. 3; United Kingdom House of Commons, “UK Government
Policy on Afghanistan,” January 8, 2024, p. 4; William Byrd,
“Afghanistan Requires a Change from Business as Usual,”
Lawfare, March 29, 2023.
91		 “20 countries receiving the highest sum of net official
development assistance from official donors worldwide
in 2022,” Statista website: statista.com/statistics/1360457/

86 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

world-net-official-development-aid-recipients/ (accessed July
5, 2024).
92		 Afghanistan dropped from the fourth largest recipient
of U.S. aid in 2022 to the sixth in 2023. “Foreign Aid by
Country: Who’s Getting the Most and by How Much?,”
ConcernUSA website: https://concernusa.org/story/foreignaid-by-country-getting-how-much/, February 10, 2024; Julia
Haines, “Countries That Receive the Most Foreign Aid from
the United States,” U.S. News and World Report, January
18, 2024; Patrick Wintour, “UK should restore diplomatic
presence to help Afghan women, says aid chief,” Guardian:
https://www.theguardian.com/world/article/2024/jul/11/
uk-should-restore-diplomatic-presence-afghan-women-aidchief-afghanistan, July 10, 2024.
93		 World Health Organization, “Funding Pause Results in
Imminent Closure of More Than 2000 Health Facilities in
Afghanistan,” September 6, 2021; Kate Clark, “Taxing the
Afghan Nation: What the Taleban’s pursuit of domestic
revenues means for citizens, the economy and the state,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, September 2022; Kate Clark,
“Killing the Goose that Laid the Golden Egg: Afghanistan’s
economic distress post 15-August,” Afghan Analysts
Network, November 11, 2021.
94		 World Bank, “Restructuring Paper on a Proposed Project
Restructuring of Afghanistan Health Emergency Response
(HER) Project to UNICEF,” May 24, 2022, electronic p.
5; World Bank, “Supporting the People of Afghanistan,”
World Bank website: https://www.worldbank.org/en/
country/afghanistan/brief/afghanistan-emergency-support
(accessed July 9, 2024), April 23, 2024; Mustafa Basij
Rashikh and Alyssa Sharkey, “Transitioning Afghanistan’s
Health Sector: The Urgent Need for Taliban Responsibility,”
ThinkGlobalHealth, October 11, 2023.
95		 Daniel Runde, Annie Pforzheimer, Thomas Bryja, Caroline
Smutny, “The Future of Assistance for Afghanistan: A
Dilemma,” Center for Strategic and International Studies,
June 2024, p. 2.
96		 UN Security Council, “The situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security,”
S/2024/469, June 13, 2024, p. 11.
97 William Byrd, “Two Years into Taliban Rule, New Shocks
Weaken Afghan Economy,” United States Institute of Peace,
August 10, 2023; Devex, “A ‘death sentence for millions’ as
US cuts more aid,” April 8, 2025.
98		 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress,
April 30, 2025, p. 26.
99		 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress,
April 30, 2025, p. 7.
100 Norwegian Refugee Council, “Afghanistan: Crippling aid
cuts threaten lives and wellbeing of the most vulnerable,”
NRC website: https://www.nrc.no/news/2025/march/
afghanistan-crippling-aid-cuts-threaten-lives-and-wellbeingof-the-most-vulnerable, March 24, 2025; National Public
Radio, “A midwife says of the aid cuts in Afghanistan: ‘No
one prioritizes women’s lives,’ NPR website: https://www.
npr.org/sections/goats-and-soda/2025/03/31/g-s1-56594/
childbirth-usaid-afghanistan, March 31, 2025.
101 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress,
April 30, 2025, pp. 26–27.
102 International Crisis Group, “Toward a Self-sufficient
Afghanistan,” January 30, 2024, p. 2.
103 “Letter dated 8 November 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
November 9, 2023,” UN Security Council, p. 12.

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

104 “Letter dated 8 November 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
November 9, 2023,” UN Security Council, pp. 10, 14.
105 Daniel Runde, Annie Pforzheimer, Thomas Bryja, and
Caroline Smutny, “Future of U.S. Assistance to Afghanistan:
A Dilemma,” Center for Strategic and International Studies,
June 2024, pp. 7, 9, 10, 11; Kate Bateman, “A Shift Toward
More Engagement with the Taliban?,” United States Institute
of Peace, October 25, 2023; Independent Commission for
Aid Impact, “UK Humanitarian Aid to Afghanistan: Concept
Note,” July 2024, pp. 7, 15-16; International Crisis Group,
“Toward a Self-Sufficient Afghanistan,” January 30, 2024, p. 4.
106 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; U.S. Army and
Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field Manual, FM 3-24,
December 2006, pp. 43-44, 189, 192; Paul Fishstein and Aman
Farahi, “The World’s Humanitarian, Economic, and Political
Engagement with the Taliban,” NYU Center on International
Cooperation, January 2023, p. 6; Ashley Jackson,
Negotiating Survival: Civilian-Insurgent Relations in
Afghanistan, (Hurst Publishers, 2021), pp. 56, 162.
107 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; Kevin Haidary,
Chairman of the World Hazara Council, SIGAR interview,
March 9, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 9,
2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 25, 2023;
Ashley Jackson, Negotiating Survival: Civilian-Insurgent
Relations in Afghanistan, (Hurst Publishers, 2021), pp.
56, 173; Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is
It Time for a Candid Conversation?” Afghanistan Analyst
Network, October 1, 2023, p. 19.
108 Ashley Jackson, Negotiating Survival: Civilian-Insurgent
Relations in Afghanistan, (Hurst Publishers, 2021), pp.
56, 173; Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is
It Time for a Candid Conversation?” Afghanistan Analyst
Network, October 1, 2023, p. 19.
109 Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 1, 2023;
former NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, August 35, 2023.
110 United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy
Analysis—Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of USAID, May
2023, p. 5.
111 Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 1, 2023;
NGO Official, SIGAR interview, August 25, 2023; NGO
director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023; implementing
partner director, SIGAR interview, February 16, 2024; State,
response to SIGAR data call, December 13, 2023; Islamic
Emirate of Afghanistan, “The procedure for coordinating the
activities and regulating the affairs of domestic and foreign
institutions and NGOs,” Ministry of Economy, October 22,
2022, (translation by Link Translations), p. 5.
112 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 14, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 30, 2023; former NGO official, SIGAR
interview, May 16, 2023; implementing partner Director, SIGAR
interview, February 16, 2024; NGO Officials, SIGAR interview,
August 31, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023.
113 Kevin Haidary, chairman of the World Hazara Council,
SIGAR interview March 9, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 1, 2023; NGO officials, SIGAR interview,
August 31, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 22,
2023; businessman, SIGAR interview, April 3, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023; implementing

114

115

116

117

118

119
120

121

partner director, SIGAR interview, February 16, 2024; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, August 8, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview,
August 25, 2023; former NGO official, SIGAR interview,
May 16, 2023; third-party monitor, SIGAR interview, July 6,
2023; United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy
Analysis—Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of USAID, May
2023, p. 39.
Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023;
third-party monitor, SIGAR interview, July 6; implementing
partner director, SIGAR interview, February 16, 2024; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 22, 2023; UNICEF official, SIGAR
interview, July 12, 2023; Jonathan Landay, “Exclusive: U.N.
Proposing Paying Nearly $6 Million to Taliban for Security,”
Reuters website: https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/
exclusive-un-proposing-paying-nearly-6-million-talibansecurity-document-source-2021-12-21/, December 21, 2021.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Seeking Information:
Sirajuddin Haqqani,” FBI website: https://www.fbi.gov/
wanted/terrorinfo/sirajuddin-haqqani/@@download.pdf,
(accessed May 19, 2025).
UN policy requires that aid be provided with the consent
of the recipient country and respect for its sovereignty.
Nevertheless, there are tensions even with friendly
governments. For example, the Indian government
passed a law in 2020 imposing limitations on what civil
society organizations can do with foreign funding. Other
countries that have imposed restrictions on civil society
organizations in recent years include Bangladesh, Bolivia,
Ecuador, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Nicaragua,
and Peru. The government of Pakistan has also complained
about donors encroaching on its sovereignty. UN General
Assembly, “General Assembly Resolution 46/182 which
led to the creation of the Department of Humanitarian
Affairs,” December 19, 1991, electronic p. 3; Ashley Jackson,
“Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it Time for a Candid
Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network, September
30, 2023, p. 17; Catherine Davison, “How India has ramped
up its crackdown on NGOs,” Devex, April 28, 2023; Thomas
Carothers and Sasha Brechenmacher, “Closing Space:
Democracy and Human Rights Support Under Fire,”
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2014, pp. 5, 7,
10; Ashley Jackson, “Taleban Perceptions of Aid: Conspiracy,
Corruption and Miscommunication,” Afghanistan Analysts
Network, July 30, 2023, pp. 13, 16–17.
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, “Which Countries Have
Relations with The Taliban’s Unrecognized Government?”
May 30, 2024; Implementing partner director, SIGAR
interview, February 16, 2024; civil society activist, SIGAR
interview, May 31, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview,
March 22, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 14,
2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2023; SIGAR,
Why the Afghan Government Collapsed, SIGAR-23-05-IP,
November 15, 2022, p. 3.
“Aid Worker Security Database 2024,” https://www.
aidworkersecurity.org/ (accessed March 19, 2025).
UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
“Afghanistan: Humanitarian Access Snapshot,” January 2025,
p. 1.
This pattern goes back decades. According to a 2023
United States Institute of Peace report, studies of the

AUGUST 2025 | 87

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

122

123

124

125

126

127
128

129
130

Taliban’s shadow government showed that, in areas the
group controlled, there was “a clear pattern…of increased
interference.” The more the Taliban consolidated security,
“the less tentative they proved to be when it came to
asserting their authority over NGO operation and most other
aspects of society.” United States Institute of Peace “Political
Economy Analysis – Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of
USAID, May 2023, p. 34; Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion
in Afghanistan: Is It Time for a Candid Conversation?”
Afghanistan Analyst Network, October 1, 2023, p. 12.
USUN Rome, “WFP Officials Report Taliban Central
Leadership Increasingly Willing to Interfere in Aid Delivery,”
UN Rome 62 cable, April 2022, p. 3.
U.S. Office Afghanistan Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan:
Humanitarian Assistance Official Warns of Draft Code of
Conduct and Urges Donor Coordination to Stave Off Crisis,”
AAU 202 cable, August 23, 2022, p. 4.
SIGAR survey of Afghan currency exchange companies,
September 21, 2023; Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview,
October 30, 2023; Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview,
December 14, 2023; Afghan businessman, email to SIGAR
interview, March 22, 2024.
In 2019, the Afghan government spent about 20 billion
afghanis on the Ministry of Public Health; in 2022, the Taliban
spent 2 billion. (2022 was the last year that the Taliban
released any sort of budget publicly. However, an article in the
Afghan media outlet Zan Times indicated that the Taliban’s
2023-2024 budget was substantially like that budget, in that
half of the regime’s spending went to the security sector and
very little to social services.) Rustam Seerat, “Analyzing the
Taliban for 2023-2024: Prioritizing military spending over
citizen welfare,” Zan Times: https://zantimes.com/2023/05/11/
analyzing-the-taliban-budget-for-2023-24-prioritizing-militaryspending-over-citizen-welfare/ (accessed May 19, 2025), May
11, 2023; World Bank, “Afghanistan Development Update:
Uncertainty After Fleeting Stability,” October 2023, p. 37.
Businessman, SIGAR interview, February 28, 2024; former
senior Afghan government official, SIGAR interview, March
14, 2024; civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31,
2023; implementing partner director, SIGAR interview,
February 16, 2024; NGO director, SIGAR interview, October
2, 2024; NGO official, SIGAR interview, April 25, 2023.
ACAPS, “Afghanistan: Analysis of Localisation Challenges,”
February 7, 2023, p. 5.
Timor Karimy, founder and president of the Bamyan
Foundation, SIGAR interview, March 17, 2023; businessman,
SIGAR interview, February 28, 2024; former senior Afghan
government official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2024;
civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023;
implementing partner director, SIGAR interview, February
16, 2024; NGO director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2024;
World Food Programme third-party monitoring staffer,
SIGAR interview, July 6, 2023; former employee of the
Gulzad Group, SIGAR interview, October 24, 2024; UN
official, SIGAR interview, July 12, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, April 25, 2023.
NGO director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2024.
This percentage reflects aid disbursements. Between
2022 and 2024, WFP was also the single largest recipient
of combined U.S. and international funds donated to the
UN’s Afghanistan humanitarian response appeal. SIGAR,
Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, January
30, 2025, pp. 5, 118; UN OCHA, Financial Tracking Service,

88 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

131

132

133
134
135
136
137

138

139

140
141

142
143
144
145
146

147

“Afghanistan Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan,
Coordinated Plan Data,” 2021-2024.
NGO director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2024;
businessman, SIGAR interview, February 28, 2024; former
senior Afghan government official, SIGAR interview, March
14, 2024; World Food Programme third-party monitoring
staffer, SIGAR interview, July 6, 2023; Timor Karimy, founder
and president of the Bamyan Foundation, SIGAR interview,
March 17, 2023; civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May
31, 2023; former employee of the Gulzad Group, SIGAR
interview, October 24, 2024; NGO official, SIGAR interview,
April 25, 2023.
NGO director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2024;
businessman, SIGAR interview, April 3, 2023; former senior
Afghan government official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2024;
implementing partner director, SIGAR interview, February
16, 2024; UN official, SIGAR interview, July 12, 2023.
Former senior government official, SIGAR interview, March
14, 2024.
Former senior Afghan government official, SIGAR interview,
March 14, 2024.
Implementing partner director, email to SIGAR, December
17, 2024.
Implementing partner director, email to SIGAR, May 19, 2025.
World Food Programme third-party monitoring staffer,
SIGAR interview, July 6, 2023; civil society activist, SIGAR
interview, May 31, 2023; former employee of the Gulzad
Group, SIGAR interview, October 24, 2024; civil society
activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023.
Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023; NGO
director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2024; former senior
Afghan government official, SIGAR interview, February 28,
2024.
In addition, other roles that interviewees implicated are
were staff with the titles Head of Area Office and World
Food Programme third-party monitoring managers. World
Food Programme third-party monitoring staffer, SIGAR
interview, July 6, 2023; former senior Afghan government
official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2024; UN official, SIGAR
interview, July 12, 2023; NGO director, SIGAR interview,
October 2, 2023.
NGO director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023;
businessman, SIGAR interview, February 28, 2024.
A former senior Afghan government official explained it a
bit differently, saying that potential UN contractors must
simultaneously negotiate with UN staff and Taliban officials
over kickbacks. Former senior Afghan government official,
SIGAR interview, March 14, 2024; NGO director, SIGAR
interview, October 2, 2023.
NGO official, email to SIGAR, May 19, 2025.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, April 13, 2023.
Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023; civil
society activist, email to SIGAR, March 21, 2025.
World Food Programme third-party monitoring staffer,
SIGAR interview, July 6, 2023.
United Nations Development Programme, “2024 Quarter
One Report: Funding Facility for Stabilization,” March 31,
2024, pp. 7, 52.
Simona Foltyn, “U.N. staff on a £1.5bn Iraq aid project
‘demanding bribes,’” Guardian, January 22, 2024, https://
www.theguardian.com/global-development/2024/jan/22/
united-nations-development-programme-undp-briberyclaims-iraq-aid-project.

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

148 Simona Foltyn, “UN to Investigate Claims of Corruption in
Iraq Aid Project,” Guardian, February 5, 2024, https://www.
theguardian.com/global-development/2024/feb/05/un-to-investigate-claims-of-corruption-in-iraq-aid-project.
149 Civil society activist, email to SIGAR, December 29, 2023.
150 United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy
Analysis: Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of USAID, May
2023, p. 39.
151 Former senior Afghan government official, February 28, 2024.
152 Former senior Afghan government official, February 28, 2024.
153 Former employee of the Gulzad Group, SIGAR interview,
October 24, 2024; World Food Programme third-party
monitoring staffer, SIGAR interview, July 6, 2023.
154 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023; Civil
society activist, email to SIGAR, December 29, 2023.
155 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 22, 2023; businessman, SIGAR
interview, April 3, 2023; former UN official, SIGAR interview,
May 1, 2023; former NGO official, SIGAR interview, May
16, 2023; implementing partner, SIGAR interview, July 6,
2023; UNICEF official, SIGAR interview, July 12, 2023;
Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is It Time
for a Candid Conversation,” Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023; Hardin Lang, “Fit for Purpose: Getting
Humanitarian Aid: Right in Afghanistan One Year after the
Taliban Takeover,” Refugees International, August 18, 2023,
p. 13; Jonathan Landay, “Exclusive: U.N. Proposing Paying
Nearly $6 Million to Taliban for Security,” Reuters: https://
www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/exclusive-un-proposingpaying-nearly-6-million-taliban-security-documentsource-2021-12-21/, December 21, 2021.
156 Ashley Jackson, Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it Time for
a Candid Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023, pp. 23–24.
157 Former UN official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023.
158 The UN has described Badri 313 as “one of the best
equipped military factions” in the country. “Letter dated 25
May 2022 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) addressed
to the President of the Security Council,” May 26, 2022,
p. 9; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, March 22, 2023; UN official, SIGAR
interview, July 12, 2023.
159 Former UN official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023.
160 Afghanistan expert Jackson has called for “a serious
rethink” of the practice. Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion
in Afghanistan: Is It Time for a Candid Conversation?,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, September 2023; Annabel
Bassil, “Armed escorts to humanitarian convoys: An
unexplored framework under international humanitarian
law,” International Review of the Red Cross, vol. 102, no.
914 (2020), p. 561.
161 William Plowright, “Humanitarianism’s Thing Red Line:
Armed Escorts in Theory and Practice,” Journal of
Humanitarian Affairs, Vol. 5, No. 3, 23-31, 2024, pp. 23, 28–29;
“Sudan unrest: What are the Rapid Support Forces?” Al
Jazeera, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/4/16/sudanunrest-what-is-the-rapid-support-forces, April 16, 2023.
162 Former UN official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023; former
NGO official, May 16, 2023.
163 Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023.
164 Implementing partner, SIGAR interview, July 6, 2023.
165 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023.

166 Hardin Lang, “Fit for Purpose: Getting Humanitarian Aid Right
in Afghanistan,” Refugees International, August 18, 2023.
167 Former UN official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023.
168 UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
“UN-CMCoord Field Handbook, Version 2.0,” 2018, p. 162.
169 UN Inter-Agency Standing Committee, “Inter-Agency
Humanitarian Evaluation of the Yemen Crisis,” July 14, 2022,
pp. xv, 90, 126.
170 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023;
third-party monitor, SIGAR interview, July 6; implementing
partner director, SIGAR interview, February 16, 2024; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023.
171 Inter-Agency Standing Committee, “Inception Report: InterAgency Humanitarian Evaluation of the Response to the
Humanitarian Crisis in Afghanistan,” June 30, 2023, p. 38.
172 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023; thirdparty monitor, SIGAR interview, July 6; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, August 8, 2023.
173 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023.
174 NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023.
175 NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023.
176 NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023.
177 NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023.
178 Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023.
179 Third-party monitor, SIGAR interview, July 6, 2023.
180 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023.
181 Implementing partner director, SIGAR interview, February
16, 2024.
182 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023.
183 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023.
184 Natasha Hall, “Rescuing Aid in Syria,” Center for Strategic
and International Studies, February 2022, pp. 31, 32.
185 Nidal Betare and Sasha Ghosh-Siminoff, “A Crisis of Conscience:
Aid Diversion in Syria and the Impact on the International Aid
System,” New Lines Institute, June 2022, p. 6.
186 “Obstacles to Aid Pile up as Sudan’s Conflict Rages On,”
New Humanitarian, June 29, 2023; Mat Nashed, “Sudanese
authorities accused of INGO cash shakedown amid aid
freeze,” Devex: https://www.devex.com/news/sudaneseauthorities-accused-of-ingo-cash-shakedown-amid-aidfreeze-103024, April 15, 2022.
187 Jessica Trisko Darden, Aiding and Abetting: U.S. Foreign
Assistance and State Violence, (Stanford University Press,
2020), p. 5.
188 Sabawoon Samim and Ashley Jackson, “Taleban Perceptions
of Aid: Conspiracy, Corruption, and Miscommunication,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, July 2023, p. 3; ACAPS,
“Working Under the ITA’s Evolving NGO Regulations,” July
31, 2023, p. 7; Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, “Procedure
for Coordinating the Activities and Regulating the Affairs of
Domestic and Foreign Institutions and NGOs,” Article IV:
Coordination Mechanism, October 2, 2022, p. 5.
189 U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes from
the Field,” Afghanistan Affairs Unit cable 244, October 4,
2022.
190 World Food Programme, “General Conditions on the Field
Level Agreement,” February 2024, p. 2.
191 Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, “The procedure for coordinating
the activities and regulating the affairs of domestic and foreign
institutions and NGOs,” Ministry of Economy, October 22, 2022
(translation by Link Translations).
192 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023; civil society
activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023.

AUGUST 2025 | 89

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

193 State Department, response to SIGAR data call, September
2023; United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy
Analysis—Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of USAID,
May 2023, pp. 34, 40; NGO official, SIGAR interview, May
1, 2023; UNICEF official, SIGAR interview, July 12, 2023;
implementing partner staffer, SIGAR interview, September
13, 2023.
194 United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy
Analysis—Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of USAID, May
2023, p. 34.
195 NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023.
196 State Department, response to SIGAR data call, December
13, 2022.
197 NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 25, 2023.
198 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023; civil
society activist, email to SIGAR, December 29, 2023.
199 Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023;
businessman, SIGAR interview, February 28, 2024; former
senior government official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2024.
200 A requirement to register with the Ministry of Economy
dates back at least as far as 2005, when it was detailed
in Article 15 of the 2005 NGO law. Islamic Emirate of
Afghanistan, “Procedure for Coordinating the Activities and
Regulating the Affairs of Domestic and Foreign Institutions
and NGOs,” Article IV: Coordination Mechanism, October
2, 2022, p. 5; ACAPS, “Afghanistan: Working under the ITA’s
evolving NGO regulations,” July 31, 2023, p. 7.
201 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023; implementing partner,
SIGAR interview, April 27; former NGO official, SIGAR
interview, May 16, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, August
25, 2023; NGO director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023.
202 Memorandum of understanding between a healthcare NGO
and the Taliban Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, 2022,
provided to SIGAR on condition of confidentiality, January
29, 2024.
203 SIGAR, Memorandums of Understanding (MOU) with
Taliban-Led Ministries: State Department’s Implementing
Partners MOUs have had Mixed Effect on Assistance
Delivery, SIGAR-25-22-AR, April 2025, electronic p. 2, p. 9.
204 Memorandum of understanding between a healthcare NGO
and the Taliban Ministry of Public Health, 2023. provided to
SIGAR on condition of confidentiality, February 29, 2024.
Memorandum of understanding between a healthcare NGO
and the Taliban Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, 2023,
provided to SIGAR on condition of confidentiality, February
29, 2024.
205 Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023;
implementing partner, SIGAR interview, April 23, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, April 3, 2023; NGO director, SIGAR
interview, October 2, 2023.
206 Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023; NGO
director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023.
207 U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes from the
Field,” Afghanistan Affairs Unit cable 214, October 4, 2023.
208 U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes from
the Field,” AAU cable 4, January 4, 2024.
209 This official suggested to the UN that if they wanted
his work to be implemented under a memorandum of
understanding, they should negotiate with the Taliban
themselves. Implementing partner official, SIGAR interview,
February 16, 2024.

90 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

210 U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes from
the Field,” Afghanistan Affairs Unit cable 248, October 11,
2022.
211 U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes from
the Field,” Afghanistan Affairs Unit cable 260, October 31,
2022.
212 NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023.
213 UNICEF official, SIGAR interview, July 12, 2023.
214 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023; SIGAR survey
of Afghan NGOs, August 31, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 30, 2023.
215 For example, UN agencies require their partner organizations
to be legally registered according to the laws of the country
they work in, which means an MOU with the Taliban. World
Food Programmme, “General Conditions on the Field Level
Agreement,” memorandum, February 2024, p. 11; UNESCO,
“Directives concerning UNESCO’s partnership with nongovernmental organizations,” legal affairs memorandum,
March 19, 2024, electronic p. 4; UN High Commissioner
for Refugees, “General Conditions of Conduct for Bilateral
Project Partnership Agreements,” September 2023, p. 2;
UNICEF, “Guidance for Civil Society Organizations on
Partnership with UNICEF,” February 2020, p. 11.
216 Kevin Haidary, chairman of the World Hazara Council, SIGAR
interview March 9, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview,
March 1, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview August 31,
2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, March 22, 2023; businessman,
SIGAR interview, April 3, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview,
March 30, 2023; implementing partner director, SIGAR
interview, February 16, 2024; NGO official, SIGAR interview,
March 6, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023;
NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 25, 2023.
217 SIGAR survey of Afghan NGOs, August 31, 2023.
218 Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023.
219 NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 25, 2023.
220 Memorandum of understanding between a healthcare
NGO and the Taliban Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs,
2023, provided to SIGAR on condition of confidentiality,
February 29, 2024. Memorandum of understanding between
a healthcare NGO and the Taliban Ministry of Labor and
Social Affairs, 2022, provided to SIGAR on condition of
confidentiality, January 29, 2024.
221 SIGAR survey of Afghan NGOs, August 31, 2023.
222 Memorandum of understanding between a healthcare
NGO and the Taliban Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs,
2023, provided to SIGAR on condition of confidentiality,
February 29, 2024; Memorandum of understanding
between a healthcare NGO and the Taliban Ministry of
Labor and Social Affairs, 2022, provided to SIGAR on
condition of confidentiality, January 29, 2024. U.S. Embassy
Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes From the Field,”
Afghanistan Affairs Unit cable 4, January 5, 2024; U.S.
Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes From the
Field,” Afghanistan Affairs Unit cable 30, February 2, 2024;
U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes from
the Field,” AAU cable 196, September 18, 2023.
223 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 1, 2023.
224 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023.
225 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023.
226 U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes From
the Field,” Afghanistan Affairs Unit cable 4, January 5, 2024.

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

227 U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan Affairs Unit: Notes From
the Field,” Afghanistan Affairs Unit cable 30, February 2, 2024.
228 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 22, 2023.
229 The Taliban have historically been very suspicious of
organizations that employ medical professionals to go into
private homes. NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 14,
2023. NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2023.
230 With Afghanistan’s long history of ethnic tension, saturating
an organization with a single, historically empowered ethnic
group may result in bias and discrimination against minorities,
regardless of how closely aligned individual employees are
with the Taliban. NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 1, 2023,
March 1, 2023; civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31,
2023; Kevin Haidary, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023; Timor
Karimy, founder and president of Bamyan Foundation, SIGAR
interview, March 17, 2023.
231 About 80 percent of Afghans speak Dari, historically
considered the lingua franca of the country. Bilingualism
is very common, and about half of Afghans speak Pashto,
the native language of the Pashtuns. NGO official, SIGAR
interview, August 25, 2023.
232 USAID, response to SIGAR data call, September 15, 2023.
233 Former senior government official, SIGAR interview, March
14, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, April 13, 2024.
234 NGOs can make a profit by spending only a portion of their
budget on their program, keeping the rest as illicit personal
profit. Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023;
implementing partner director, SIGAR interview, February
16, 2024; former employee of the Gulzad Group, SIGAR
interview, October 24, 2023.
235 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023.
236 Former senior government official, SIGAR interview, March
14, 2023.
237 Treasury Department, “General License No. 20, Authorizing
Transactions to Afghanistan, or Governing Institutions in
Afghanistan,” Office of Foreign Asset Control, February 25,
2022.
238 UN Security Council, “Resolution 2615 (2021), Adopted by
the Security Council at its 8941st meeting, on 22 December
2021,” December 22, 2021, electronic pp. 2–3; “Under
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Martin Griffiths Statement for the
Security Council Briefing on the Humanitarian Situation
in Afghanistan, 20 December 2022,” December 20, 2022,
electronic p. 4.
239 “Under Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Martin Griffiths Statement
for the Security Council Briefing on the Humanitarian
Situation in Afghanistan, 20 December 2022,” December 20,
2022, electronic p. 4.
240 SIGAR, U.S. Funds Benefitting the Taliban-Controlled
Government: Implementing Partners Paid at Least $10.9
Million and Were Pressured to Divert Assistance, SIGAR
24-22-AR, May 20, 2023, pp. 6–7.
241 SIGAR, U.S. Funds Benefitting the Taliban-Controlled
Government: Implementing Partners Paid at Least $10.9
Million and Were Pressured to Divert Assistance, SIGAR
24-22-AR, May 20, 2023, electronic p. 1.
242 SIGAR, U.S. Funds Benefitting the Taliban-Controlled
Government: Implementing Partners Paid at Least $10.9
Million and Were Pressured to Divert Assistance, SIGAR
24-22-AR, May 20, 2023, electronic p. 1.
243 SIGAR, U.S. Funds Benefitting the Taliban-Controlled
Government: Implementing Partners Paid at Least $10.9

244

245
246

247
248
249
250

251

252
253

254
255

256

257

258

Million and Were Pressured to Divert Assistance, SIGAR
24-22-AR, May 20, 2023, pp. 7, 10.
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Income Tax Law, Chapter
II, Article 10, March 2009, electronic p. 10; Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan, Law on Non-Government Organizations,
Chapter III, Article 30, 2005, electronic p. 10; NGO director,
SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023.
Implementing partner director, SIGAR interview, February
16, 2024.
United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy
Analysis: Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of USAID, May
2023, p. 40.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023.
Implementing partner, SIGAR interview, February 16, 2024.
Implementing partner director, SIGAR interview, February
16, 2024.
Katherine Haver and William Carter, “What it takes:
Principled pragmatism to enable access and quality
humanitarian aid in insecure environments,” Secure Access
in Volatile Environments, November 2016, p. 59.
Peer Schouten, Ken Matthysen and Thomas Muller, “Checkpoint
Economy: the political economy of checkpoints in South
Sudan, ten years after independence,” Danish Institute for
International Studies, December 2021, pp. 12, 19-20.
Former UN official, SIGAR interview, April 13, 2023.
Civil Society Activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023;
former NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 1, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 22, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview,
April 13, 2023.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, October 19, 2023.
“The Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement and Non-Governmental
Organisations (NGOs) in Disaster Relief,” International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and
the ICRC, January 1, 1994, p. 3; Marina Sharpe, “It’s all
relative: the humanitarian principles in historical and legal
perspective,” International Committee of the Red Cross
Humanitarian Law & Policy website: https://blogs.icrc.
org/law-and-policy/2023/03/16/humanitarian-principleshistorical-legal/, March 16, 2023.
As of a January 30, 2025 report, WFP has received about
a third of both U.S. and total aid to Afghanistan since
the Taliban takeover. (This U.S. percentage reflects aid
disbursements, rather than appropriations.) SIGAR,
Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, January
30, 2025, pp. 5, 118, 143; World Food Programme, “General
Conditions on the Field Level Agreement,” February 2024.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, October 19, 2023; Civil society activist,
SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 6, 2023; Kevin Haidary, chairman of the
World Hazara Council, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023.
Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan Ministry
of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry and Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “Agriculture
and Food Production in Post-War Afghanistan: A Report on
the Winter Agricultural Survey, 2002-2003,” August 2003, p.
29; Jamshid Ahmadi, “Afghanistan Geography: Mountain
regions and region specific soil types,” International
Journal of Multidisciplinary Research and Growth
Evaluation, vol. 2, no. 3, May-June 2021, p. 327; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, August 25, 2023.

AUGUST 2025 | 91

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

259 NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 25, 2023.
260 In addition to being predominantly non-Pashtun, Panjshir
has historically been a center of anti-Taliban resistance.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 25, 2023.
261 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023; Timor
Karimy, founder and president of the Bamyan Foundation,
SIGAR interview, March 17, 2023; Kevin Haidary, chairman
of the World Hazara Council, SIGAR interview, March 9,
2023; Farkhoundeh Akbari, “The Risks Facing Hazaras in
Taliban-Ruled Afghanistan,” George Washington University
Program on Extremism, March 7, 2022; Maisam Iltaf,
“Taliban’s Disruption of Aid Programs Push Hazaras to the
Brink,” Kabul Now, September 24, 2023; Mahsa Elham, Sana
Atef, and Sayed Mahdi Hashemi, “How the Taliban Pilfer
Humanitarian Aid,” Zan Times, April 24, 2023.
262 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, April 25, 2023; Timor Karimy,
founder and president of the Bamyan Foundation, SIGAR
interview, March 17, 2023.
263 Kevin Haidary, chairman of the World Hazara Council,
SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023.
264 Kevin Haidary, chairman of the World Hazara Council,
SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023.
265 Kevin Haidary, chairman of the World Hazara Council,
SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023; Zalmai Nishat, SIGAR
interview, February 27, 2024.
266 While there is an argument that the logistics of reaching
Hazara populations in more remote parts of Afghanistan are
more difficult and could be a reasonable explanation for less
aid getting there, the logistics or security challenges in Kabul
are minimal. Kevin Haidary, chairman of the World Hazara
Council, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023.
267 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023; Kevin
Haidary, chairman of the World Hazara Council, SIGAR
interview, March 9, 2023.
268 Civil society activist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023.
269 Timor Karimy, founder and president of the Bamyan
Foundation, SIGAR interview, March 17, 2023.
270 Bamyan Foundation, “Management of Humanitarian Aid
Distribution to the People of Afghanistan, Especially the
Hazaras,” January 12, 2022.
271 Bamyan Foundation, “Management of Humanitarian Aid
Distribution to the People of Afghanistan, Especially the
Hazaras,” January 12, 2022.
272 UN High Commissioner on Refugees-World Food
Programme, “Joint Guidance: Targeting of Assistance to
Meet Basic Needs,” pp. 8, 11.
273 Implementing partner director, SIGAR interview, February
16, 2024; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023;
NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 8, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 22, 2023.
274 The official observed that WFP halted their programming for
several months and then restarted, but did not know how
the situation resolved. NGO official, SIGAR interview, March
9, 2023.
275 Implementing partner director, SIGAR interview, February
16, 2024.
276 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 22, 2023.
277 UN official, SIGAR interview, May 2, 2023.
278 Radio Free Europe/ Radio Liberty, “Eight Orphan Children
Found Dead from Starvation In Kabul,” October 24, 2021;
Sabawoon Samim and Ashley Jackson, “Taleban Perceptions
of Aid: Conspiracy, Corruption, and Miscommunication,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, July 2023, p. 17.

92 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

279 Radio Free Europe/ Radio Liberty, “Cash-Strapped Taliban
Uses Foreign Aid Intended for Starving Afghans To Pay State
Employees,” January 25, 2022.
280 Third-party monitor, SIGAR interview, July 6, 2023.
281 Food packages given to the most impoverished may be
redistributed more equally, or packages initially distributed
equally may be redistributed to the poorest, depending on
the perspective and context of very localized authorities.
Implementing partner, email correspondence with SIGAR,
November 7, 2023.
282 World Bank, “Afghanistan Welfare Monitoring Survey, Round
3,” October 2023, p. 6.
283 Implementing partner, SIGAR interview, April 27, 2023.
284 World Bank, “Afghanistan Development Update: Uncertainty
After Fleeting Stability,” October 2023, p. 7.
285 Haroun Rahimi, “The Taliban in Government: A Grim New
Reality,” Al Jazeera, March 23, 2023.
286 Salma Alokozai and Khalid Payenda, “Analysing Taliban’s
Budget Expenditures and Revenues: Understanding the
Regime’s Policies and Priorities,” Afghanistan Research
Network at London School of Economics, June 2023, p. 7.
287 U.S. Office Afghanistan Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan:
Taliban Disclose Few Details About 2024 National Budget,
AAU 170 cable, June 10, 2024, p. 3.
288 World Bank, Afghanistan Development Update: Uncertainty
After Fleeting Stability, October 2023, p. 37.
289 World Bank, “Afghanistan Development Update: Uncertainty
After Fleeting Stability,” October 2023, p. 36.
290 International Rescue Committee, “Afghanistan: An Entire
Population Pushed into Poverty,” December 22, 2022, last
updated August 9, 2023.
291 World Bank, “Afghanistan Development Update: Uncertainty
After Fleeting Stability,” October 2023, p. 37.
292 U.S. Office Afghanistan Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan:
Taliban Disclose Few Details About 2024 National Budget,”
AAU 170 cable, June 10, 2024, p. 4.
293 World Bank, “Afghanistan Development Update: Uncertainty
After Fleeting Stability,” October 2023, p. 17; USAID,
response to SIGAR data call, September 15, 2023.
294 SIGAR, Status of Education in Afghanistan: Taliban Policies
have Resulted in Restricted Access to Education and a
Decline in Quality, SIGAR 24-01-IP, October 2023, p. 16.
295 Sarah Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina, and Leah
Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,”
Chatham House International Security Programme and New
York University’s Center for International Cooperation, April
2023, p. 37.
296 Jessica Trisko Darden, Aiding and Abetting: U.S. Foreign
Assistance and State Violence, (Stanford University Press,
2019), p. 24.
297 Jessica Trisko Darden, Aiding and Abetting: U.S. Foreign
Assistance and State Violence, (Stanford University Press,
2019), pp. 52–62.
298 Jessica Trisko Darden, Aiding and Abetting: U.S. Foreign
Assistance and State Violence, (Stanford University Press,
2019), pp. 31, p. 41.
299 Justin Lynch, “South Sudan starves as aid blocked, money
spent on fighting,” Associated Press, October 14, 2016.
300 Jessica Trisko Darden, Aiding and Abetting: U.S. Foreign
Assistance and State Violence, (Stanford University Press),
2019, p. 104.
301 UN OHCR, “South Sudanese political elites illicitly diverting
millions of US dollars, undermining core human rights

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

302

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

and stability – UN experts note,” Human Rights Council
Statement, September 23, 2021.
William Byrd, “Taliban are Collecting Revenue – But How
are They Spending it?,” United States Institute of Peace,
February 2, 2022; William Byrd, “Afghanistan Requires
Change from Humanitarian Business as Usual,” Lawfare,
March 30, 2023, electronic p. 6; World Bank, “Afghanistan
Development Update: Uncertainty After Fleeting Stability,”
October 2023, p. 7; Haroun Rahimi, “The Taliban in
Government: A Grim New Reality,” Al Jazeera, March 23,
2023; Salma Alokozai and Khalid Payenda, “Analysing
Taliban’s Budget Expenditures and Revenues: Understanding
the Regime’s Policies and Priorities,” Afghanistan Research
Network at London School of Economics, June 2023, p. 7;
U.S. Office Afghanistan Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan:
Taliban Disclose Few Details About 2024 National Budget,
AAU 170 cable, June 10, 2024, p. 3.
William Byrd, “Afghanistan Requires Change from
Humanitarian Business as Usual,” Lawfare, March 30, 2023,
electronic p. 6.
Jessica Trisko Darden, Aiding and Abetting: U.S. Foreign
Assistance and State Violence, (Stanford University Press,
2019), p. 25.
United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy
Analysis: Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of USAID, May
2023, pp. 37–38.
Congressional Research Service, “Afghanistan:
Humanitarian Crisis, Economic Collapse, and U.S.
Sanctions,” February 9, 2022, p. 1; Federal Reserve Bank of
New York official, SIGAR interview, June 25, 2023.
Reuters, “EXCLUSIVE U.N. aims to launch new Afghanistan
cash route in February: U.N. note,” February 11, 2022; The
New Humanitarian, “How vague money laundering and
counter-terror rules slow aid,” May 23, 2023; World Bank,
“Afghanistan Private Sector Rapid Survey: an Assessment
of the Business Environment – Round 2,” September 2022,
p. 13; Afghan businessman with knowledge of the banking
sector, SIGAR interview, December 14, 2023; Afghan
businessman with knowledge of the banking sector, email to
SIGAR, March 11, 2025.
Wire transfers to and from Afghanistan stopped entirely
for a time after the Taliban took control and appointed
sanctioned individuals to key cabinet posts—a list of
appointments that included Interior Minister Sirajuddin
Haqqani, who, until recently, appeared on the FBI’s Most
Wanted list. UNDP, “The Afghan Banking and Financial
System Situation Report,” November 22, 2021, p. 2; Peter
Bergen, “He’s on the FBI’s Most-Wanted List and is Now
a Key Member of the Taliban’s New Government,” CNN,
September 9, 2023.
(SIGAR has not been able to obtain the amount for 2024).
SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress,
April 30, 2024, p. 61.
William Byrd, “Wrestling with a Humanitarian Dilemma in
Afghanistan,” United States Institute of Peace, January 25,
2023; United Nations Security Council, The Situation in
Afghanistan and its Implications for International Peace and
Security,” September 18, 2023, p. 10.
Shadi Khan Saif and Sally Brooks, “Deliveries of millions
in hard cash prompts concern over financial transparency
in Afghanistan,” Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
December 10, 2022, electronic p. 2.

312 Lynne O’Donnell, “The Taliban Are Abusing Western Aid,
Not Just Women,” Foreign Policy, December 30, 2022,
electronic p. 3.
313 Michael T. McCaul, chairman, House Foreign Affairs
Committee, letter to the Special Inspector General for
Afghanistan Reconstruction, March 13, 2023, electronic
pp. 2, 4.
314 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress,
October 30, 2023, p. 5.
315 SIGAR survey of Afghan currency exchange companies,
September 21, 2023; Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor
of the Afghan Central Bank, SIGAR interview, November
10, 2022; Federal Reserve Bank of New York staff, SIGAR
interview, June 25, 2023; Afghan businessman, SIGAR
interview, October 30, 2023; Wahid Nosher, SIGAR interview,
former acting governor of the central bank, November 30,
2022; Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview, December 14,
2023; person with knowledge of the Afghan banking sector,
SIGAR interview, August 21, 2023; former DAB official,
SIGAR interview, April 13, 2023; Kunwar Khuldune Shahid,
journalist, SIGAR interview, June 21, 2023; businessman,
email to SIGAR, April 12, 2024.
316 SIGAR survey of Afghan currency exchange companies,
September 21, 2023; Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview,
December 14, 2023; UN official, SIGAR interview, August
2, 2023; UN official, SIGAR interview, November 16, 2023;
someone with knowledge of the Afghan banking sector,
SIGAR interview, August 21, 2023.
317 Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central
Bank, SIGAR interview, November 10, 2022.
318 Former DAB official, SIGAR interview, April 13, 2023;
SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress,
January 30, 2023, p. 79.
319 However, this ban is imperfectly enforced, and, in practice,
aid organizations use a mixture of afghanis and other
currencies in Afghanistan. SIGAR, Cash Shipments to
Afghanistan: the UN has Purchased and Transported
More than $2.9 Billion to Afghanistan to Implement
Humanitarian Assistance, SIGAR-24-14-IP, pp. 5, 6.
320 SIGAR, Cash Shipments to Afghanistan: the UN has
Purchased and Transported More than $2.9 Billion to
Afghanistan to Implement Humanitarian Assistance,
SIGAR-24-14-IP, electronic p. 3.
321 Natasha Hall, Karam Shaar, and Mungeth Othman Agha,
“How the Assad Regime Systematically Diverts Tens of
Millions in Aid,” Center for Strategic and International
Studies, October 20, 2021, electronic p. 2; Sarah Cliffe,
Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina, and Leah Zamore, “Aid
Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,” Chatham
House International Security Programme and New York
University’s Center for International Cooperation, April 2023,
pp. 23–24; “UN Procurement Contracts in Syria: A ‘Few’
Bad Apples,” Syrian Legal Development Programme and
Observatory of Political and Economic Networks, 2022, p.
8; Michelle Nichols, “Exclusive: UN Report Accuses Yemen
Government of Money-Laundering, Houthis of Taking State
Revenue,” Reuters, January 26, 2021; Daniel van Oudenaren,
“Politicized Humanitarian Aid is Fueling South Sudan’s Civil
War,” New Humanitarian, February 27, 2017; Abdul Qadir
Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central Bank, SIGAR
interview, November 10, 2022; Afghan businessman, SIGAR
interview, October 30, 2023; SIGAR, Afghanistan’s AntiCorruption Efforts, SIGAR-18-51-AR, May 2018, p. vi.

AUGUST 2025 | 93

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

322 Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central
Bank, SIGAR interview, November 10, 2022.
323 Sarah Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina, and Leah
Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,”
Chatham House International Security Programme and New
York University’s Center for International Cooperation, April
2023, pp. 23–24; Natasha Hall, Karam Shaar, and Mungeth
Othman Agha, “How the Assad Regime Systematically
Diverts Tens of Millions in Aid,” Center for Strategic and
International Studies, October 20, 2021, electronic pp.
3-4; “UN Procurement Contracts in Syria: A ‘Few’ Bad
Apples,” Syrian Legal Development Programme and
Observatory of Political and Economic Networks, 2022, p.
8; Michelle Nichols, “Exclusive: UN Report Accuses Yemen
Government of Money-Laundering, Houthis of Taking State
Revenue,” Reuters, January 26, 2021; Daniel van Oudenaren,
“Politicized Humanitarian Aid is Fueling South Sudan’s
Civil War,” New Humanitarian, February 27, 2017; Suliman
Baldo, “Sudan’s Exchange Rate: How to Sustain Progress
and Preempt Risks,” March 2021, p. 2.
324 Radio Tamazuj, “Son of central bank governor involved in
currency trading in Juba,” July 2015.
325 Sarah Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina and Leah
Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,”
Chatham House International Security Programme and New
York University’s Center for International Cooperation, April
2023, pp. 23–24; Natasha Hall, Karam Shaar, and Mungeth
Othman Agha, “How the Assad Regime Systematically
Diverts Tens of Millions in Aid,” Center for Strategic and
International Studies, October 20, 2021; Syrian Legal
Development Programme and Observatory of Political and
Economic Networks, “UN Procurement Contracts in Syria:
a ‘few’ Bad Apples,” 2022, p. 8; Michelle Nichols, “Exclusive:
UN Report Accuses Yemen Government of MoneyLaundering, Houthis of Taking State Revenue,” Reuters,
January 26, 2021; Daniel van Oudenaren, “Politicized
Humanitarian Aid is Fueling South Sudan’s Civil War,” New
Humanitarian, February 27, 2017; Suliman Baldo, “Sudan’s
Exchange Rate: How to Sustain Progress and Preempt
Risks,” March 2021, p. 2.
326 Natasha Hall, Karam Shaar, and Mungeth Othman Agha,
“How the Assad Regime Systematically Diverts Tens of
Millions in Aid,” Center for Strategic and International
Studies, October 20, 2021, p. 2.
327 Natasha Hall, Karam Shaar, and Mungeth Othman Agha,
“How the Assad Regime Systematically Diverts Tens of
Millions in Aid,” Center for Strategic and International
Studies, October 20, 2021, electronic p. 3.
328 Natasha Hall, Karam Shaar, and Mungeth Othman Agha,
“How the Assad Regime Systematically Diverts Tens of
Millions in Aid,” Center for Strategic and International
Studies, October 20, 2021, electronic p. 3.
329 Michelle Nichols, “Exclusive: U.N. Report Accuses Yemen
Government of Money Laundering, Houthis of Taking State
Revenue,” Reuters, January 26, 2021, electronic p. 3.
330 UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, “Cash Shipments to
the UN in Afghanistan: Info Sheet,” January 9, 2023.
331 Former DAB official, SIGAR interview, April 13, 2023.
332 Someone with knowledge of the Afghan banking sector,
SIGAR interview, August 21, 2023.
333 SIGAR, Cash Shipments to Afghanistan: the UN has
Purchased and Transported More than $2.9 Billion to
Afghanistan to Implement Humanitarian Assistance,
SIGAR-24-12-IP, electronic p. 3.

94 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

334 Former DAB official, SIGAR interview, April 13, 2023.
335 When the afghani lost significant value in the first year
after the Taliban takeover, food became significantly
more expensive, causing rates of hunger to shoot up. For
example, the price of imported wheat flour, the country’s
most important food staple, rose by about 50 percent
between July 2021 and July 2022. However, UN cash
flights subsequently contributed to the stabilization of
the exchange rate and lowered food prices. World Bank,
“Afghanistan Economic Monitor,” July 31, 2023, pp. 2,
4; SIGAR, Cash Shipments to Afghanistan: the UN has
Purchased and Transported More than $2.9 Billion to
Afghanistan to Implement Humanitarian Assistance,
SIGAR-24-14-IP, January 2024, p. 2.
336 DAB also determines which currency traders may bid by
issuing or revoking their money service provider licenses.
State told SIGAR that after August 2021, the Talibancontrolled Afghan central bank cancelled the licenses of all of
the country’s currency traders, requiring them to reapply to
secure new ones. State Department response to SIGAR data
call, September 2023; Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, “Da
Afghanistan Bank, Foreign Currency Auction Regulations,”
pp. 1, 13. Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview, October 30,
2023; Wahid Nosher, SIGAR interview, former acting governor
of the central bank, November 30, 2022; Afghan businessman,
SIGAR interview, December 14, 2023.
337 According to Pakistan-based journalist Kunwar Khuldune
Shahid, currency exchange in both Afghanistan and Pakistan
is dominated by a group of approximately ten individuals he
calls a “dollar cartel.” Khuldune Shahid, “The Af-Pak Dollar
Cartel,” Diplomat, January 27, 2023; Afghan businessman,
SIGAR interview, October 30, 2023; SIGAR survey of Afghan
currency exchange companies, September 21, 2023.
338 SIGAR survey of Afghan currency exchange companies,
September 21, 2023.
339 “Understanding Arbitrage Opportunities: a Practical
Approach,” Faster Capital website: https://fastercapital.com/
articles/Understanding-Arbitrage-Opportunities--A-PracticalApproach.html (accessed March 12, 2025).
340 SIGAR survey of Afghan currency exchange companies,
September 21, 2023.
341 Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview, October 30, 2023;
Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview, December 14, 2023.
342 Islamic Government of Afghanistan, “Da Afghanistan
Bank Foreign, Currency Auction Regulations: Exhibit F:
Operational Guidelines for Conduct of Foreign Currency
Auctions,” approved by the Afghan Central Bank’s Supreme
Council on July 25, 2013, p. 13.
343 Afghan businessman, email to SIGAR interview, March 22,
2024.
344 According to the IRS, the average USD to Afghani exchange
rate in the years 2022, 2023, and 2024 was 81.12 Afghanis
to the dollar. Therefore, (1 USD/81.12 Afghani) * (3 Afghani
profit) * $3.6 billion = $133.1 million. Internal Revenue
Service website, “Yearly average currency exchange rates,”
https://www.irs.gov/individuals/international-taxpayers/
yearly-average-currency-exchange-rates (accessed February
19, 2025); SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States
Congress, April 30, 2024, pp. 61–62.
345 Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central
Bank, SIGAR interview, November 10, 2022.
346 Wahid Nosher, SIGAR interview, November 30, 2022.

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

347 Paul Wachtel and Mario Blejer, “A Fresh Look at Central
Bank Independence,” Winter 2020, CATO Journal, (accessed
December 20, 2023).
348 Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview, December 14, 2023;
Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central
Bank, SIGAR interview, November 10, 2022.
349 Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central
Bank, SIGAR interview, November 10, 2022; Wahid Nosher,
SIGAR interview, November 30, 2022.
350 Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central
Bank, SIGAR interview, November 10, 2022.
351 Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central
Bank, SIGAR interview, November 10, 2022; Tim Cox,
Office of the USAID Inspector General, “Review of USAID/
Afghanistan’s Bank Supervision Assistance Activities
and the Kabul Bank Crisis (Report No. F-306-11-003-S),”
memorandum to USAID/Afghanistan Director Earl W. Gast,
March 16, 2011, pp. 1–2.
352 State response to SIGAR data call, September 2023.
353 Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central
Bank, SIGAR interview, November 10, 2022.
354 A 2023 assessment of the Taliban central bank,
commissioned by USAID, specifically warned that it had no
independence from Taliban leadership. Instead, its top three
officials were “long-standing senior Taliban members with
full decision-making authority.” USAID, “Assessment and
Third-Party Monitoring of Afghanistan’s Central Bank: Final
Report – Detailed Assessment,” March 2023, p. 4; Abdul
Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Afghan Central Bank,
SIGAR interview, November 10, 2022.
355 SIGAR, Afghan Fund Inquiry: Response to the U.S. House
Foreign Affairs Committee, January 4, 2024, p. 20.
356 AmuTV, “Taliban appoints new Central Bank governor: who
is he?,” July 7, 2024.
357 Noor Ahmad Agha is also known as Ahmad Zia Agha.
AmuTV, “Taliban appoints new Central Bank governor: Who
is he?” July 7, 2024.
358 AmuTV, “Taliban appoints new Central Bank governor: Who
is he?” July 7, 2024.
359 UN official, SIGAR interview, May 2, 2023.
360 Several SIGAR interviewees described an implicit policy of
‘don’t ask, don’t tell’ that forces aid implementers to grapple
with the dilemma of whether the compromises they make
are doing more harm than good—because the policymakers
and donors who should address that dilemma do not wish to
acknowledge it. USAID official, SIGAR interview, March 17,
2023; former senior government official, SIGAR interview,
March 4, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, April 5,
2023; Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time for Change:
The Normalization of Corruption and Diversion in the
Humanitarian Sector,” Centre on Armed Groups, April 26,
2024, p. 16.
361 SIGAR, The Risk of Doing the Wrong Thing Perfectly:
Monitoring and Evaluation of Reconstruction Contracting
in Afghanistan, SIGAR 21-41-LL, July 14, 2021, pp. 57–58.
362 Mark Bowden and Shirazuddin Siddiqi, “NGOs and Civil
Society in Afghanistan,” Overseas Development Institute,
November 2, 2020, pp 10–11; Ashley Jackson and Antonio
Giustozzi, “Talking to the Other Side: Humanitarian
Engagement with the Taliban in Afghanistan,” Overseas
Development Institute, December 10, 2012, p. 5; Ashley
Jackson, “Life under the Taliban shadow government,”
Overseas Development Institute, June 20, 2018, p. 16;
Ashley Jackson, Negotiating Survival: Civilian-Insurgent

363

364

365
366

367

368
369
370

371

372

373
374

375

Relations in Afghanistan, (C. Hurst & Co., 2021), pp.
162, 163, 165; UN official, SIGAR interview, April 20, 2023;
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023; Mark Ward,
country director, International Medical Corps, SIGAR
interview, February 4, 2022.
The Taliban’s memorandum of understanding requirement
made communicating with them virtually unavoidable. See
pp. 19–25.
NGO officials, SIGAR interview, December 7, 2022;
implementing partner chief of party, SIGAR interview,
November 21, 2022; SIGAR, U.S. Funds Benefitting the
Taliban-Controlled Government: Implementing Partners
Paid at Least $10.9 Million and Were Pressured to Divert
Assistance, SIGAR 24-22-AR, May 20, 2023, pp. 15–16.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, December 14, 2022.
Valid Evaluations, “Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation
of the Response to the Crisis in Afghanistan,” produced on
behalf of the UN’s Inter-Agency Standing Committee, April
22, 2024, p. 6.
Implementing partner, SIGAR interview, April 27, 2023;
former NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023; NGO
director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023.
USAID, “BHA Sanctions Risk Analysis and Management
Documentation,” November 17, 2022.
USAID, response to SIGAR data call, September 6, 2023.
USAID, “Certifications, Assurances, Representations, and
Other Statements of the Recipient A Mandatory Reference
for ADS” Chapter 303, updated July 26, 2022, p. 4.
USAID, “Responsibility to Identify and Report Potential
Diversion of U.S Humanitarian Aid to Hamas and Other
Foreign Terrorist Organizations,” Office of the Inspector
General, November 2023, pp. 1–2.
United Nations Security Council, “Fourteenth report of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
submitted pursuant to resolution 2665 (2022) concerning
the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities
constituting a threat to the peace stability and security of
Afghanistan,” S/2023/370, May 23, 2023, p. 23; UN Security
Council, “Resolution 1988, Adopted by the Security
Council at its 6557st meeting on 17 June, 2011,” S/RES/1988
(2011), June 17, 2011, p. 3; Council on Foreign Relations,
Backgrounder, “What are Economic Sanctions,” June 24,
2024; Congressional Research Service, “Coup Related
Restrictions in U.S. Foreign Aid Appropriations,” December
12, 2023, p. 1.
Consolidated Appropriations Act for 2023, Pub. L. No. 117103, 136 Stat. 650 (2022.).
Treasury, “Fact Sheet: Provision of Humanitarian Assistance
to Afghanistan and Support for the Afghan People,” April 13,
2022, pp. 1, 4; SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States
Congress, January 30, 2022, pp. 90–92.
These general licenses do not authorize financial transfers
to the Taliban, the Haqqani Network, any entity in which
the Taliban or the Haqqani Network owns, directly or
indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, a 50 percent
or greater interest, or any blocked individual who is in a
leadership role of a governing institution in Afghanistan,
other than for the purpose of effecting the payment of
taxes, fees, or import duties, or the purchase or receipt of
permits, licenses, or public utility services, provided that
such payments do not relate to luxury items or services.
Treasury Department, response to SIGAR data call, June
28, 2024; Adam Weinstein, “Strategic Patience: Sustainable

AUGUST 2025 | 95

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

376

377
378
379

380

381

382
383

384

385
386

387

Engagement with a Changed Afghanistan,” Quincy Institute
for Responsible Statecraft, August 2022, pp. 8–9.
Treasury, “Supplemental Guidance for the Provision of
Humanitarian Aid,” Department Office of Foreign Assets
Control, February 27, 2023, p. 4.
SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress,
January 30, 2022, p. 8.
Natasha Hall, “Rescuing Aid in Syria,” Center for Strategic
and International Studies, February 2022, p. 23.
The government of Canada did not authorize development
aid to Afghanistan until 2024. Prior to that decision, NGOs
had expressed frustration with their government’s response
to this issue. The head of one organization lamented that
although they had been able to provide health and nutrition
assistance, until 2024, they were restricted from implementing programs supporting women’s rights because those
programs are categorized as development aid. The line
between humanitarian and development aid is not always
well defined, and aid groups run the risk that one of their
programs might be categorized as development aid, leaving
them vulnerable to prosecution. Dylan Robertson, “Aid
Groups Say Ottawa Still Hampering Work in Afghanistan,
Despite Legislation,” Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
News, November 23, 2023; UN News, “WFP Plan Aims to
Prevent Further Food Diversion in Ethiopia,” May 23, 2023.
U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan: Interim RC/HC Asserts
UN Delivering Principled Humanitarian Assistance, But
Needs More Support,” AAU cable 150, August 7, 2023.
“An Analysis of Contemporary Anti-Diversion Policies and
Practices of Humanitarian Organizations,” Counterterrorism
and Humanitarian Engagement Project, Harvard Law School
and Brookings, May 2014, pp. 5, 11.
Audrey Bottjen, “CSRF Policy Brief: When Policies Backfire,”
Conflict Sensitive Resource Facility, April 2024, p. 3.
The support to Iran consisted of landmine clearance in
preparation for an oil development project. The youth
leadership project in Gaza reportedly involved participants
from Hamas, the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of
Palestine, but it is unclear how Norwegian People’s Aid
vetted participants or the extent to which they were aware
of participant’s affiliations. USAID Office of Inspector
General, “Gaza Response: Responsibility to Identify and
Report Potential Diversion of U.S Humanitarian Aid
to Hamas and Other Foreign Terrorist Organizations,”
November 2023, p. 1.
The Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund has since been
renamed the Afghanistan Resilience Trust Fund. USAID,
“Activity Approval Memorandum: USAID 2022 Project
Contribution to the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund,”
September 15, 2022, p. 2.
Natasha Hall, “Rescuing Aid in Syria,” Center for Strategic
and International Studies, February 2022, p. 23.
A veteran NGO official with long experience in Afghanistan
told SIGAR that “a zero-risk policy is not realistic.” SIGAR,
Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, January 30,
2023, p. 9; Conflict sensitivity expert, SIGAR interview, July
13, 2023; former NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 1,
2023; NGO director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, October 19, 2023.
Paul Fishstein, “Humanitarian Assistance in Afghanistan:
What’s Next?,” New York University Center for International
Cooperation website: https://cic.nyu.edu/resources/

96 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

388

389
390

391

392

393

394

395

396
397

398

399

400
401

humanitarian-assistance-in-afghanistan-whats-next/
(accessed March 15, 2024), December 21, 2021.
Similarly, William Byrd, writing for Lawfare, described
the goal of zero tolerance as “chimerical.” William Byrd,
“Afghanistan Requires a Change from Humanitarian Business
as Usual,” Lawfare, https://www.lawfaremedia.org/article/
afghanistan-requires-change-humanitarian-business-usual,
March 29, 2023; UN official, SIGAR interview, March 22, 2023.
Former U.S. official, SIGAR interview, April 4, 2023.
SIGAR, The Risk of Doing the Wrong Thing Perfectly:
Monitoring and Evaluation of Reconstruction Contracting
in Afghanistan, SIGAR-21-41-LL, July 14, 2021, p. xvii.
Katherine Haver and William Carter, “What It Takes:
Principled pragmatism to enable access and quality
humanitarian aid in insecure environments,” Secure Access
in Volatile Environments, November 2016, pp. 57–58;
“Navigating Ethical Dilemmas for Humanitarian Action in
Afghanistan,” United Kingdom Humanitarian Innovation
Hub and Humanitarian Outcomes, June 2023, p. 9.
Ashley Jackson and Antonio Giustozzi, “Talking to the
Other Side: Humanitarian Engagement with the Taliban in
Afghanistan,” Humanitarian Policy Group Working Paper,
ODI, December 10, 2012, p. 7; Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion
in Afghanistan: Is it time for a Candid Conversation?,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, September 2023, p. 28;
Abby Stoddard, Paul Harvey, Monica Czwarno, MeriahJo Breckenridge, “Humanitarian Access SCORE Report:
Afghanistan,” Humanitarian Outcomes, April 2020, p. 11.
Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for
a Candid Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023.
United Kingdom Department for International Development,
“Humanitarian Assistance and Conflict: Findings from an
Internal DFID Conflict Sensitivity Review,” undated, p. 2.
Katherine Haver and William Carter, “What It Takes:
Principled pragmatism to enable access and quality
humanitarian aid in insecure environments,” Secure Access
in Volatile Environments, November 2016, p. 11.
Former UN official, SIGAR interview, November 20, 2023.
Elizabeth Shackleford, former State Department official,
SIGAR interview, March 13, 2023; Till Bruckner and Jon
Entine, “How Corrupt is the World Food Programme?,”
American Enterprise Institute, April 11, 2010.
Norwegian Refugee Council, “Weathering the Storm:
Why and how development financing actors should stay
engaged during political crises,” February 2024, p. 21; Till
Bruckner and Jon Entine, “How Corrupt is the World Food
Programme?,” American Enterprise Institute, April 11, 2010;
UN official, SIGAR interview, April 20, 2023.
UN official, SIGAR interview 30, May 1, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 4, 2024; governance expert, SIGAR
interview, November 17, 2022; Till Bruckner and Jon Entine,
“How Corrupt is the World Food Programme?,” American
Enterprise Institute, April 11, 2010; Katherine Haver and
William Carter, “What It Takes: Principled pragmatism to
enable access and quality humanitarian aid in insecure
environments,” Secure Access in Volatile Environments
research program, Humanitarian Outcomes, p. 11; United
Kingdom Department for International Development,
Humanitarian Assistance and Conflict: Findings from an
Internal DFID Conflict Sensitivity Review, undated.
Former USAID official, SIGAR interview, April 4, 2023.
Elizabeth Shackleford, former State Department official,
SIGAR interview, March 14, 2023.

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

402
403
404
405
406

407
408

409
410

411

412

413
414

415

416
417

Implementing partner, SIGAR interview, July 12, 2023.
Kevin Haidary, SIGAR interview, March 9, 2023.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2023.
Audrey Bottjen, “CSRF Policy Brief: When Policies Backfire,”
Conflict Sensitivity Research Facility, April 2024, p. 3.
SIGAR, Corruption in Conflict: Lessons from the U.S.
Experience in Afghanistan, SIGAR 16-58 LL, September
1, 2016, p. 2; Audrey Bottjen, “CSRF Policy Brief: When
Policies Backfire,” Conflict Sensitivity Research Facility,
April 2024, p. 3.
Audrey Bottjen, “CSRF Policy Brief: When Policies Backfire,”
Conflict Sensitivity Research Facility, April 2024, p. 3.
Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time for Change:
The Normalization of Corruption and Diversion in the
Humanitarian Sector,” Centre on Armed Groups, April 17,
2024, p. 15.
Donor official, SIGAR interview, March 5, 2024.
Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for
a Candid Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023, pp. 22, 30.
Aid organizations face “an overwhelming pressure to reach
beneficiaries quickly” and “deliver at all costs.” Principled
aid delivery and outperforming the competition in the eyes
of donors are often contradictory goals. Organizations are
disincentivized to pause aid to improve their negotiating
position with a regime, since any delay could result in
donors cutting their funding and replacing them with a
competitor. An implementing partner told SIGAR that it is
impossible for partners to uphold their principles, because
we “must show we are providing assistance in order to
keep getting funding.” United Kingdom Department for
International Development, Humanitarian Assistance and
Conflict: Findings from an Internal DFID Conflict Sensitivity
Review, n.d., p. 2; Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time
for Change: The Normalization of Corruption and Diversion
in the Humanitarian Sector, Centre on Armed Groups,
2024, p. 2; NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 6, 2023;
Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for
a Candid Conversation?”, Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023, pp. 12–13; implementing partner, SIGAR
interview, July 12, 2023.
Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time for Change:
The Normalization of Corruption and Diversion in the
Humanitarian Sector,” Centre on Armed Groups, April 17,
2024, p. 3.
UN Official, SIGAR interview, April 20, 2023.
Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion in Afghanistan: Is it time for
a Candid Conversation?,” Afghanistan Analysts Network,
September 2023, p. 28; ACAPS “Afghanistan: Working under
the ITA’s evolving NGO regulations,” July 31, 2023, p. 10;
implementing partner, SIGAR interview, April 27, 2023.
Abby Stoddard, Paul Harvey, Monica Czwarno, MeriahJo Breckenridge, “Humanitarian Access SCORE Report:
Afghanistan,” Humanitarian Outcomes, April 2020, p. 11.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023.
Some version of this provision has been included in every
aid appropriation since. Foreign Assistance and Related
Programs Appropriations Act, Pub. L. No. 99-190, Sec. 513,
100 Stat. 1185 (1985). This policy has also been adopted
by multilateral organizations, including the African Union,
the Organization of American States, and the European
Union. Sarah Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina and Leah
Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,”
Chatham House International Security Programme and New

418

419

420

421

422

423

424

York University’s Center for International Cooperation, April
2023, p. 10.
Sarah Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina and Leah
Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,”
Chatham House International Security Programme and New
York University’s Center for International Cooperation April
2023, pp. 2, 7, 21; Katherine Haver and William Carr, “What
It Takes: Principled pragmatism to enable access and quality
humanitarian aid in insecure environments,” Secure Access
in Volatile Areas, November 2016, p. 28; Norwegian Refugee
Council, “Weathering the Storm: Why and how development
financing actors should stay engaged during political crises,”
February, 2024, p. 18; BBC, “Afghanistan: World Bank halts
aid after Taliban takeover,” August 24, 2021; Sarah Rose
and Michael Pisa, “Crafting the International Response
in Afghanistan: Options to Enable Financial Flows and
Promote ‘Beyond-Humanitarian’ Aid,” Center for Global
Development, May 24, 2022, p. 8.
USAID Office of Inspector General, “Public International
Organizations: USAID Did Not Consistently Perform
Expected Due Diligence,” E-000-24-002-M August 22, 2024,
pp. 2-3, 5-6; USAID Office of Inspector General, “Insufficient
Oversight of Public International Organizations Puts U.S.
Foreign Assistance Programs at Risk,” September 25, 2018,
pp. 2, 19; USAID, response to SIGAR data call, May 2023, pp.
3–4, 6, 10; U.S. official, SIGAR interview, April 4, 2023.
European Commission, “Afghanistan: Commission
Announces press release, October 12, 2021; United Nations
“Transitional Engagement Framework for Afghanistan,”
January 2022, p. 2; World Bank Group, “World Bank
Group Announces Next Phase of Support for People of
Afghanistan,” press release, February 15, 2023; USAID
Activity Approval Memorandum, “USAID 2022 Project
Contribution to the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund,”
September 15, 2022; Humanitarian Outcomes, “Supporting
Capacities for Social Assistance in Yemen,” produced on
behalf of the Foreign Commonwealth and Development
Office, unpublished, November 6, 2023 draft, p. 14; Sarah
Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina, and Leah Zamore, “Aid
Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,” Chatham House
International Security Programme and New York University’s
Center for International Cooperation, April 2023, pp. 20–21;
NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023.
William Byrd, “Afghanistan Requires a Change from
Business as Usual,” Lawfare, March 29, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, April 5, 2023; UNICEF official, SIGAR
interview, February 7, 2023; Norwegian Refugee Council,
“Weathering the Storm,” February 2024, p. 6; Lauren Hutton
and the Conflict Sensitivity Resource Facility, Aid and
Government: Conflict Sensitivity and the State in South
Sudan,” produced on behalf of the United Kingdom, Swiss,
Dutch, and Canadian Donor Missions in South Sudan,
December 2018, p. 14.
Sarah Rose and Michael Pisa, “Crafting the International
Response in Afghanistan: Options to Enable Financial Flows
and Promote ‘Beyond-Humanitarian’ Aid”, Center for Global
Development, May 2022, p. 12.
United Nations Security Council, “Fourteenth report of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
submitted pursuant to resolution 2665 (2022) concerning
the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities
constituting a threat to the peace stability and security of
Afghanistan,” S/2023/370, May 23, 2023, p. 5.
USAID official, SIGAR interview, July 13, 2023.

AUGUST 2025 | 97

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

425 United States Institute of Peace, “Political Economy Analysis:
Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of USAID, May 2023, p. 39.
426 Implementing partner official, July 12, 2024, SIGAR interview.
427 The Afghan diplomats who worked at the embassy,
appointed by the previous government, do not represent
Afghanistan in the United States. Many of them applied for
asylum or other protected status to remain in the United
States. Lara Jakes, “Afghan Embassy, Now Out of Money, Will
Shut Down, U.S. Says,” The New York Times, March 11, 2022.
428 Karen DeYoung, “U.S. holds first direct talks with Taliban
since withdrawal,” Washington Post, October 2, 2021;
State Department, “U.S. Delegation Meeting with Taliban
Representatives,” media note, July 1, 2022; State, “Special
Representative for Afghanistan,” mission statement, n.d.
429 Karen DeYoung, “U.S. holds first direct talks with Taliban
since withdrawal,” Washington Post, October 2, 2021; State
Department, “U.S. Delegation Meeting with Senior Taliban
Representatives in Doha,” press release, October 10, 2021.
430 State Department, “U.S. Delegation Meeting with Senior
Taliban Representatives in Doha,” press release, October
10, 2021; State, “Special Representative for Afghanistan,”
mission statement, n.d.
431 State Department, “U.S. Relations with Afghanistan,”
Bilateral Relations Fact Sheet, August 15, 2022.
432 State Department, “U.S. Delegation Meeting with Senior
Taliban Representatives in Doha,” press release, October
10, 2021. State, “U.S. Delegation Meeting with Taliban
Representatives,” readout, November 30, 2021; State, “U.S.
Delegation Meeting with Taliban Representatives,” press
release, July 1, 2022; State Department, “U.S. Delegation
Meeting with Taliban Representatives on Afghanistan
Central Bank Reserves,” media note, July 28, 2022; State,
“Meeting of U.S. Official with Taliban Representatives,”
media note, July 31, 2023.
433 U.S. Office Afghanistan Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan:
Doha III Taliban Delegation Who’s Who - and What to
Expect,” AAU cable 188, June 28, 2024.
434 U.S. Office Afghanistan Affairs Unit Doha, “Afghanistan:
Doha III Taliban Delegation Who’s Who - and What to
Expect,” AAU cable 188, June 28, 2024.
435 State Office of Inspector General, “Inspection of the
Afghanistan Affairs Unit,” November 2022, pp. 1–2.
436 U.S. Embassy Kabul, “Scenesetter for Assistant Secretary Lu
Visit to Doha,” 21 Kabul 2674, November 11, 2021.
437 State Department, “Integrated Country Strategy:
Afghanistan,” November 14, 2023, pp. 3, 7–8.
438 Under Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin Griffiths, “Statement
for the Security Council Briefing on the Humanitarian
Situation in Afghanistan 20 December 2022,” press release,
December 20, 2022.
439 UN General Assembly, “Report of the Credentials Committee,
Seventy-ninth Session, A/79/613, November 20, 2024, p. 2.
440 UN Security Council, “Resolution 1988, Adopted by the Security
Council at its 6557st meeting on 17 June, 2011,” S/RES/1988
(2011), June 17, 2011, p. 3; UN Security Council, “Fifteen
report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team submitted pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) concerning
the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities
constituting a threat to the peace stability and security of
Afghanistan,” S/2022/419, July 8, 2024, p. 4.
441 Voice of America, “UN Conference on Afghanistan Begins
Without Taliban,” February 18, 2024.

98 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

442 Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, “Afghan Talks Kick off in
Doha Amid Anger Over Taliban’s Exclusion of Women,” June
30, 2024.
443 United States Institute of Peace, “Where is Afghanistan
Three Years into Taliban Rule?” September 19, 2024.
444 Council of the European Union, “Council conclusions on
Afghanistan,” September 15, 2021, pp. 3–4.
445 “European Union re-establishes physical presence in
Afghanistan-spokesman,” Reuters, January 21, 2022.
446 UN High Commissioner for Refugees, “A million refugees and
migrants flee to Europe in 2015,” press release, December 22,
2015; International Crisis Group, “Beyond Emergency Relief:
Averting Afghanistan’s Humanitarian Catastrophe,” Asia
Report no. 317, December 6, 2021, pp. 15, 19–20.
447 International Crisis Group, “Beyond Emergency Relief:
Averting Afghanistan’s Humanitarian Catastrophe,” Asia
Report no. 317, December 6, 2021, p. 20.
448 Independent Commission for Aid Impact, “UK Humanitarian
Aid to Afghanistan: Information Note,” July 2024, pp. 12,
16–17.
449 Swissinfo, “Switzerland reopens its humanitarian office in
Kabul, March 31, 2025.
450 Le Monde, “To Help a Regime or a People, the Western
Dilemma,” September 13, 2024.
451 Roxanna Shapour, “Donors’ Dilemma: How To Provide Aid
To A Country Whose Government You Do Not Recognize,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, July 5, 2022, p. 18; SIGAR,
Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, SIGAR2023-QR-2, April 30, 2023, p. 56.
452 Le Monde, “To Help a Regime or a People, the Western
Dilemma,” September 13, 2024; SIGAR, Quarterly Report to
the United States Congress, April 30, 2023, p. 56.
453 Michael T. McCaul, chairman, House Foreign Affairs
Committee, letter to the Special Inspector General for
Afghanistan Reconstruction, March 13, 2023, p. 4; David
Adesnik, “A Strategy to End the Systematic Theft of
Humanitarian Aid in Syria,” Foundation for the Defense
of Democracies, March 15, 2023, pp. 3–4; USAID, “Top
Management Challenges Facing USAID in Fiscal Year
2021,” Office of the Inspector General, pp. 1, 5. USAID,
“Top Management Challenges Facing USAID in Fiscal Year
2022,” Office of the Inspector General, pp. 6–7; USAID,
“Top Management Challenges Facing USAID in Fiscal Year
2023,” Office of the Inspector General, undated, p. 3; USAID,
“Insufficient Oversight of Public International Organizations
Puts U.S. Foreign Assistance Programs at Risk,” Office of the
Inspector General, AR-8-000-18-003-P, September 25, 2018,
pp. 2, 14–15, 19, 21; USAID, “Humanitarian Assistance in
Yemen: Opportunities Exist for USAID to Further Strengthen
Its Risk Management Process,” Office of the Inspector
General, AR-8-199-22-003-P, August 23, 2022, p. 1.
454 More precisely, 72 percent of U.S. funds made available
for Afghanistan were for humanitarian purposes. SIGAR,
Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, January 30,
2025, pp. 6, 103, 115.
455 Sasha Ghosh-Siminoff, founder of People Demand Change
and senior fellow at New Lines Institute for Strategy and
Policy, email to SIGAR, June 12, 2024.
456 USAID, “Insufficient Oversight of Public International
Organizations Puts U.S. Foreign Assistance Programs at
Risk,” Office of the Inspector General, AR-8-000-18-003-P,
September 25, 2018, pp. 11, 19.
457 Senator Joni Ernst, Senator James Inhofe, Senator John
Cornyn, Senator James Risch, Senator Roy Blunt, Senator

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

458

459

460
461
462
463

464

465

466

467

468
469

Rob Portman, Senator Tim Scott, Senator Shelly Moore
Capito, Senator Bill Cassidy, Senator Steve Daines, Senator
Thom Tillis, Senator Rick Scott, and Senator Mark Kelly,
“Letter to Ambassador Power,” July 12, 2022, pp. 2–3.
Former USAID Administrator Samantha Power, “Opening
Statement on the FY 2022 Budget Request to the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee,” July 14, 2021.
USAID, “Weaknesses in Oversight of USAID’s Syria
Response Point to the Need for Enhanced Management of
Fraud Risks in Humanitarian Assistance,” Office of Inspector
General, March 4, 2021, pp. 2, 9, 12.
USAID, “Top Management Challenges Facing USAID in
Fiscal Year 2023,” Office of the Inspector General, p. 3.
Patrick Fine, “USAID Can’t Go It Alone on Localization,”
Brookings, February 5, 2024.
Council on Foreign Relations, “Funding the United Nations:
How Much Does the US Pay?,” last updated February 29, 2024.
This four-fold increase was in USAID’s funding obligations.
Patrick Fine, “Rethinking the constraints to localization of
foreign aid,” Brookings, December 1, 2022.
In subsequent correspondence, USAID clarified that they
are not directly funding any national NGOs. The State
Department directly supports six Afghan NGOs involved in
mine clearance operations. USAID, responses to SIGAR data
call, September 6, 2023, electronic p. 3; USAID, response to
SIGAR data call, May 12, 2023, electronic p. 3.
As one UN official told SIGAR, the UN has some advantages
over INGOs, particularly the fact that they have more clout
with governments, which enables them to deliver at the
macro scale.” UN official, SIGAR interview, July 26, 2023;
Paul Harvey, Abby Stoddard, Monica Czwarno, Meriah Jo
Breckenridge, and Mariana Duque Diez, “Humanitarian
Access SCORE Report: Sudan,” Humanitarian Outcomes,
December 2023, p. 13; USAID Official, SIGAR Interview,
September 5, 2023.
One USAID official interviewed by SIGAR attributed
the fact that the WFP delivers most of USAID’s food aid
in Afghanistan to the agency’s strength at orchestrating
commodity supply chains. NGO official, SIGAR interview,
November 4, 2018; Katherine Haver and William Carter,
“What It Takes: Principled pragmatism to enable access
and quality humanitarian aid in insecure environments,”
Secure Access in Volatile Environments research program,
Humanitarian Outcomes, p. 14; Paul Harvey, Abby Stoddard,
Monica Czwarno, Meriah Jo Breckenridge, and Mariana
Duque Diez, “Humanitarian Access SCORE Report: Sudan,”
Humanitarian Outcomes, December 2023, p. 13; Kara Tucker,
“Analytics drives U.N. World Food Programme response to
operations, Edeman win,” ORMS Today, June 4, 2021; World
Food Programme USA, “Is the United Nations World Food
Programme (WFP) a Trustworthy Organization?”, published
December 22, 2022, updated November 20, 2024.
Michael Igoe and Adva Salinger, “Congress Grills USAID Chief
on Localization, Ukraine, Food Crisis,” Devex, May 12, 2022;
USAID Office of Inspector General, “Insufficient Oversight
of Public International Organizations Puts U.S. Foreign
Assistance Programs at Risk,” September 25, 2018, p. 2.
U.S. official, SIGAR interview, April 4, 2023.
Sending money through multilateral organizations also
enables donors such as USAID to free up oversight staff to
focus on programs that cannot be easily outsourced. USAID
must constantly triage what it assigns its small cadre of staff
to work on. These constraints originate with Congress, which
tends to generously fund programs but has been consistently

470

471

472

473

474

475

476

477

stingier when it comes to funding for USAID to oversee those
programs. USAID official, SIGAR interview, July 13, 2023;
USAID Office of Inspector General, “Insufficient Oversight
of Public International Organizations Puts U.S. Foreign
Assistance Programs at Risk,” September 25, 2018; Patrick
Fine, “USAID Can’t Go It Alone on Localization,” Brookings,
February 5, 2024; U.S. Embassy Juba, “South Sudan:
Reflection on Process & Policy,” 21 Juba 912, August 6,
2021, p. 3; USAID Food for Peace officials, SIGAR interview,
September 27, 2018; Patrick Fine, “USAID Can’t Go It Alone
on Localization,” Brookings, February 5, 2024.
Paul Harvey, Abby Stoddard, Monica Czwarno, Meriah-Jo
Breckenridge, Mariana Duque-Diez, Humanitarian “Access
SCORE Report: Sudan,” Humanitarian Outcomes, December
2023, p. 11; Katherine Haver and William Carter, “What It
Takes: Principled pragmatism to enable access and quality
humanitarian aid in insecure environments,” Secure Access
in Volatile Environments, November 2016, p. 14; UN official,
SIGAR interview, July 26, 2023.
Norwegian Refugee Council, “Weathering the Storm: Why
and how development financing actors should stay engaged
during political crises,” February 2024, p. 18; UN official,
SIGAR Interview, July 26, 2023; Hawkins, Darren G., David
A. Lake, Daniel L. Nielson, and Michael J. Tierney, eds.
Delegation and Agency in International Organizations.
of Political Economy of Institutions and Decisions
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), p. 139.
USAID Office of Inspector General, “Insufficient Oversight
of Public International Organizations Puts U.S. Foreign
Assistance Programs at Risk,” September 25, 2018, p. 2;
Authoritarian Practices and Humanitarian Negotiations,
ed. by Andrew J. Cunningham (Routledge Humanitarian
Studies Series, 2024), p. 58. Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion
in Afghanistan: Is it time for a Candid Conversation?,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, September 2023, p. 23; Sarah
Rose and Michael Pisa, “Crafting the International Response
in Afghanistan: Options to Enable Financial Flows and
Promote ‘Beyond-Humanitarian’ Aid,” Center for Global
Development, May 24, 2022, p. 13.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2023; third party
monitor, SIGAR interview, July 6, 2023; NGO director, SIGAR
interview, October 2, 2023; implementing partner director,
SIGAR interview, February 16, 2024; UN official, SIGAR
interview, May 2, 2023.
USAID Office of Inspector General, “Insufficient Oversight
of Public International Organizations Puts U.S. Foreign
Assistance Programs at Risk,” September 25, 2018, pp. 14–15.
USAID, Template for Project Contribution, revised
December 4, 2020; USAID, “Standard Provisions for CostType Agreements with Public International Organizations;
(PIOs),” revised July 26, 2022, pp. 17, 18.
SIGAR, Public International Organizations in
Afghanistan: State Department and USAID Should Update
Agreements with Public International Organizations to
Include Available Monitoring Practices, SIGAR 25-16-AR,
March 2025, p. 15.
These are all “category one” public international
organizations, which receive the least amount of oversight
even within the category of multilateral organizations
(the industry term for which is public international
organizations). A category one designation indicates that
USAID has found the organization to be responsible at
managing funding in the past and are eligible for future
contracts without additional investigation. In 2018, the

AUGUST 2025 | 99

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

478

479
480

481
482

483
484

485
486

487

488
489

490

491

492

493

USAID inspector general found that “USAID relies on PIOs
to manage risks, despite lacking an adequate understanding
of their oversight capacity.” USAID Office of Inspector
General, “Insufficient Oversight of Public International
Organizations Puts U.S. Foreign Assistance Programs at
Risk,” September 25, 2018, pp. 2, 4.
SIGAR, Public International Organizations in
Afghanistan: State Department and USAID Should Update
Agreements with Public International Organizations to
Include Available Monitoring Practices, SIGAR-25-16-AR,
March 10, 2025, pp. 11, 12.
William Byrd, “Afghanistan Requires a Change from
Humanitarian Business as Usual,” Lawfare, March 29, 2023.
USAID Office of Inspector General, “Insufficient Oversight
of Public International Organizations Puts U.S. Foreign
Assistance Programs at Risk,” September 25, 2018, p. 14.
William Byrd, “Afghanistan Requires a Change from
Humanitarian Business as Usual,” Lawfare, March 29, 2023.
The only provision in the Code of Conduct that applies
to subcontractors is the prohibition against gender
discrimination in employment practices. UN Supplier
Code of Conduct, Rev. 06, December 2017, p. 2; Natasha
Hall, “Rescuing Aid in Syria,” Center for Strategic and
International Studies, February 2022, pp. 33, 39.
Natasha Hall, “Rescuing Aid in Syria,” Center for Strategic
and International Studies, February 2022, pp. 38–39.
Ahmad Nader Nadery, “Responsible International Aid to
Populations Ruled by Illegitimate Regimes,” Institute for
Integrated Transitions, December 2022. p. 4.
USAID official, SIGAR interview, September 5, 2023.
Ahmad Nader Nadery, “Responsible International Aid to
Populations Ruled by Illegitimate Regimes,” Institute for
Integrated Transitions, December 2022, p. 4.
Andrew J. Cunningham, ed., Authoritarian Practices and
Humanitarian Negotiations, (Routledge Humanitarian
Studies Series, 2024), p. 58.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, November 4, 2018.
Andrew J. Cunningham, ed., Authoritarian Practices and
Humanitarian Negotiations, (Routledge Humanitarian
Studies Series, 2024), p. 58.
Paul Harvey, Abby Stoddard, Monica Czwarno, Meriah-Jo
Breckenridge, Mariana Duque-Diez, “Humanitarian Access
SCORE Report: Sudan,” Humanitarian Outcomes, December
2023, p. 13; USAID official, SIGAR interview, September 5,
2023. USAID Official, SIGAR Interview, April 27, 2023.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, July 21, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023; United States Institute of
Peace, “Political Economy Analysis: Afghanistan,” produced
on behalf of USAID, May 2023, p. 39.
Astri Suhrke and Susanne Schmeidl, “Working with the
Taliban: from the first to the second Emirate,” Central Asian
Survey, vol. 42, no. 3, p. 530; Kate Bateman, “A Shift Toward
More Engagement with the Taliban?”, United States Institute
of Peace, October 25, 2023.
Sarah Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainana, and Leah Zamore,
“Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,” Chatham
House International Security Programme and New York
University’s Center for International Cooperation, April 2023,
pp. 56–57; former UN Official, SIGAR Interview, July 21, 2023;
former UN official, SIGAR interview, November 20, 2023;
former UN official, SIGAR interview, February 26, 2024; NGO
official, SIGAR interview, February 27, 2024; Daniel Runde,
Annie Pforzheimer, Thomas Bryja, and Caroline Smutny, “The

100 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

494

495
496
497

498

499
500
501

502

503

504

505

506
507
508
509

Future of Assistance for Afghanistan: A Dilemma,” Center for
Strategic and International Studies, June 2024, pp. 10–11.
Daniel Runde, Annie Pforzheimer, Thomas Bryja,
and Caroline Smutny, “The Future of Assistance for
Afghanistan,” Center for Strategic and International Studies,
June 2024, p. 11.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 5, 2024.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 4, 2023.
Human Rights Watch, “A Disaster for the Foreseeable
Future,” February 12, 2024; UN Security Council, “Report of
the independent assessment pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2679 (2023),” November 9, 2023, pp. 10, 14; Valid
Evaluations, “Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation of the
Response to the Crisis in Afghanistan,” produced on behalf
of the UN’s Inter-Agency Standing Committee April 22, 2024,
pp. 48–49.
SIGAR, The Risk of Doing the Wrong Thing Perfectly:
Monitoring and Evaluation of Reconstruction Contracting
in Afghanistan, SIGAR-21-41-LL, July 14, 2021, pp. 57–58,
245–246.
NGO Director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023.
Former UN official, SIGAR interview, February 26, 2024.
Kate Bateman, “A Shift Toward More Engagement with the
Taliban?” United States Institute of Peace, October 25, 2023;
Valid Evaluations, “Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation
of the Response to the Crisis in Afghanistan,” produced
on behalf of the UN’s Inter-Agency Standing Committee,
April 22, 2024, pp. 3–4; former UN official, SIGAR interview,
November 20, 2023.
UN Security Council, “The situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security,” June 13,
2024, p. 11.
Valid Evaluations, “Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation
of the Response to the Crisis in Afghanistan,” produced on
behalf of the UN’s Inter-Agency Standing Committee, April
22, 2024, p. 5.
Another former UN official sharply criticized isolation
tactics meant to punish the Taliban for their extreme gender
policies as “destroying an economy for the sake of helping
women”—women who will now suffer poverty as well as
oppression. The official was adamant that he considered
himself a feminist, but “if you’re doing that because you’re
a feminist, you’re a stupid feminist.” He elaborated further
on “absurd” restrictions that inadvertently harm Afghan
women: “Fields are drying up, water infrastructure has been
destroyed by US/NATO bombs, climate is getting worse,
flood-drought cycles getting more acute. Do you want to help
that woman get water into her fields?” Former UN official,
SIGAR interview, November 20, 2023; Valid Evaluations,
“Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation of the Response to
the Crisis in Afghanistan,” produced on behalf of the UN’s
Inter-Agency Standing Committee, April 22, 2024, p. 6.
Daniel Runde, Annie Pforzheimer, Thomas Bryja, and
Caroline Smutny, “The Future of Assistance for Afghanistan:
A Dilemma,” Center for Strategic and International Studies,
June 2024, p. 9.
Donor official, SIGAR interview, September 12, 2023.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 4, 2024.
Donor official, SIGAR interview, September 12, 2023.
U.S. Office Afghan Affairs Unit Doha, (SBU) “Afghanistan:
Humanitarian Needs Massive As UN Agencies and Donors
Mull Basic Needs Transition and Technical Assistance to
Taliban-Controlled Ministries,” AAU Doha cable 110, April 3,
2024, p. 3.

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

510 USAID official, SIGAR interview, September 5, 2023.
511 World Bank Group, “World Bank Group Strategy for
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence: 2020–2025,” February 26,
2020, p. viii.
512 World Bank Group, “World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility,
Conflict, and Violence: 2020–2025,” February 26, 2020, p. ix.
513 World Bank Group, “Mid-Term Review of the World Bank
Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (2020–
25),” October 20, 2023, p. ii.
514 World Bank Group, “World Bank Group Strategy for
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence: 2020–2025,” February 26,
2020, p. 18.
515 World Bank Group, “World Bank Group Strategy for
Fragility, Conflict, and Violence: 2020–2025,” February 26,
2020, p. 17; Sarah Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina
and Leah Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’
Settings: How donors can stay and deliver in fragile and
conflict-affected states,” Chatham House International
Security Programme and New York University’s Center for
International Cooperation, April 2023, p. 2.
516 Former UN official, SIGAR interview, February 26, 2024.
517 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 4, 2024.
518 Donor official, SIGAR interview, September 12, 2023;
Inter-Agency Standing Committee website, “Who We Are,”
https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/the-inter-agencystanding-committee, (accessed February 11, 2025).
519 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 5, 2024; UNICEF,
“Integrating Humanitarian Response and Development:
Programme Framework for Fragile Contexts,” April 2028.
520 Donor official, SIGAR interview, September 12, 2023;
Elizabeth Ferris, “Durable Solutions for IDPs,” Research
Briefing Paper, UN Secretary-General’s High-Level Panel on
Internal Displacement, August 2020, p. 3.
521 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 4, 2024.
522 United Nations Afghanistan, “United Nations Transitional
Engagement Framework for Afghanistan,” January 2022, p. 7.
523 Valid Evaluations, “Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation
of the Response to the Crisis in Afghanistan,” produced on
behalf of the UN’s Inter-Agency Standing Committee, April
22, 2024, pp. 5–6.
524 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress,
April 30, 2024, pp. 81, 141, 143.
525 These agencies received U.S. disbursements in fiscal year
2025 as reported by SIGAR on January 30, 2025. SIGAR,
Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, January 30,
2025, p. 118.
526 President Donald Trump, “Executive Order on Withdrawing
the United States from the World Health Organization,”
January 20, 2025; President Donald Trump, “Executive Order
on Withdrawing the United States from and Ending Funding
to Certain United Nations Organizations and Reviewing
United States Support to All International Organizations,”
February 4, 2025.
527 Valid Evaluations, “Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation
of the Response to the Crisis in Afghanistan,” produced
on behalf of the UN’s Inter-Agency Standing Committee,
April 22, 2024, pp. 5–6; United Nations Afghanistan,
“United Nations Transitional Engagement Framework for
Afghanistan,” January 2022, p. 7; Overseas Development
Institute, “Recalibrating relations with Afghanistan:
collective action by international actors,” May 2022, p. 13.
528 NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2024.
529 Former UN official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023; former
NGO official, May 16, 2023; Ashley Jackson, “Aid Diversion

530

531

532
533

534
535

536
537

538

539

540
541
542

543

544
545
546

547
548

in Afghanistan: Is It Time for a Candid Conversation?,”
Afghanistan Analysts Network, September 2023, p. 28.
Former UN official, SIGAR interview, May 1, 2023; former
NGO official, May 16, 2023; implementing partner, SIGAR
interview, July 6, 2023; United States Institute of Peace,
“Political Economy Analysis: Afghanistan,” produced on
behalf of USAID, May 2023, p. 39; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 30, 2023; implementing partner official, July
12, 2024, SIGAR interview.
U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan: Humanitarian Agencies
Using Local Exemptions to Deliver Assistance, But Warn
Operational Space Continues to Shrink,” AAU cable 10,
February 15, 2023.
NGO director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023.
The Taliban ultimately made some exceptions for female
healthcare workers. A ban on female UN staff announced
in April 2023 does not appear to have ever been enforced
and UN Humanitarian Coordinator Daniel Endres has said
that Taliban leadership privately encourages UN work. U.S.
Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan: One Year Later, Relief Actors
Deliver Principled Assistance Despite Taliban Bans and
Interference,” AAU cable 112, April 4, 2024; U.S. Embassy
Qatar, “Afghanistan: Humanitarian Agencies Using Local
Exemptions to Deliver Assistance, But Warn Operational
Space Continues to Shrink,” AAU cable 10, February
15, 2023; Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, “Law for the
Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice,” translation by
Afghanistan Analysts Network, August 2024.
USAID official, SIGAR interview, September 5, 2023.
Ahmad Nader Nadery, “Responsible International Aid to
Populations Ruled by Illegitimate Regimes,” Institute for
Integrated Transitions, December 2022, p. 4.
USAID official, SIGAR interview, July 17, 2023.
USAID Office of Inspector General, “Insufficient Oversight
of Public International Organizations Puts U.S. Foreign
Assistance Programs at Risk,” September 25, 2018, p. 14.
U.S. Embassy Qatar, “Afghanistan: Interim RC/HC Asserts
UN Delivering Principled Humanitarian Assistance, But
Needs More Support,” AAU cable 150, August 7, 2023.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 5, 2024; USAID
official, SIGAR interview, July 17, 2023; UN official, SIGAR
interview, July 26, 2023.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 4, 2024.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 4, 2024; UN official,
SIGAR interview, July 26, 2023.
UN official, SIGAR interview, July 26, 2023; NGO official,
SIGAR interview, March 4, 2024; Transcript of “Where
does foreign aid go and does it make an impact?,” Public
Broadcasting Service website: https://www.pbs.org/
newshour/show/where-does-u-s-foreign-aid-go-and-does-itmake-an-impact-2 (accessed January 17, 2025).
Former UN official, SIGAR interview, July 21, 2023; former
NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 1, 2023; NGO officials,
SIGAR interview, March 14, 2024; former UN official, SIGAR
interview, February 26, 2024.
Former UN official, SIGAR interview, February 26, 2024.
Patrick Fine, “USAID Can’t Go It Alone on Localization,”
Brookings, February 5, 2024.
David Adesnik, “A Strategy to End the Systematic Theft of
Humanitarian Aid in Syria,” Foundation for the Defense of
Democracies, March 15, 2023, p. 12.
USAID official, SIGAR interview, September 5, 2023.
Hawkins, Darren G., David A. Lake, Daniel L. Nielson,
and Michael J. Tierney, eds. Delegation and Agency in

AUGUST 2025 | 101

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

549

550

551
552
553

554

555
556

557

558
559

560

561

562

563

International Organizations. of Political Economy of
Institutions and Decisions ( Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press), 2006.
IOB Evaluations, “Inconvenient Realities: An evaluation of
Dutch contributions to stability, security, and rule of law in
fragile and conflict-affected states,” August 2023, p. 40.
Australian Agency for International Development,
“Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF): AusAID
Delivery Strategy 2011-2013,” pp. iii, 8.
Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 1, 2023.
Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, August 1, 2023.
David Adesnik, “A Strategy to End the Systematic Theft of
Humanitarian Aid in Syria,” Foundation for the Defense of
Democracies, March 15, 2023, p. 9.
Former NGO official, SIGAR interview, May 16, 2023;
Transcript of “Where does foreign aid go and does it make
an impact?,” Public Broadcasting Service website: https://
www.pbs.org/newshour/show/where-does-u-s-foreign-aid-goand-does-it-make-an-impact-2 (accessed January 17, 2025).
Patrick Fine, “Rethinking the constraints to localization of
foreign aid,” Brookings, December 1, 2022.
USAID official, SIGAR interview, July 13, 2023; monitoring
and evaluation expert, July 19, 2023; former UN official,
SIGAR interview, February 26, 2024; NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 4, 2024.
WFP seems to have had similar problems in Yemen. A USAID
official told SIGAR that in Yemen, USAID’s Bureau for
Humanitarian Assistance had a system for flagging when
grantees were not meeting their obligations, but “WFP had so
many red flags…it wasn’t worth the time to track down why
things had gone so wrong.” The monitoring and evaluation
expert explained that in Yemen, the WFP had refused to fill
out basic documentation and “continuously” failed to deliver
the right kind and amount of food on the right schedule.
Monitoring and evaluation expert, SIGAR interview, July 19,
2023.
Former UN official, SIGAR interview, February 26, 2024.
Timor Karimy, founder and president of the Bamyan
Foundation, SIGAR interview, March 17, 2023; businessman,
SIGAR interview, February 28, 2024; former senior Afghan
government official, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2024; civil
society activist, SIGAR interview, May 31, 2023; implementing
partner director, SIGAR interview, February 16, 2024; NGO
director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2024; World Food
Programme third-party monitoring staffer, SIGAR interview,
July 6, 2023; former employee of the Gulzad Group, SIGAR
interview, October 24, 2024; UN official, SIGAR interview,
July 12, 2023; NGO official, SIGAR interview, April 25, 2023;
NGO official, SIGAR interview, April 25, 2023.
Elizabeth Shackelford, SIGAR interview, March 14, 2023;
U.S. official, SIGAR interview, March 4, 2024; USAID official,
SIGAR interview, July 13, 2023.
Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time for Change:
The Normalization of Corruption and Diversion in the
Humanitarian Sector,” Centre on Armed Groups, April 26,
2024, p. 4.
USAID official, SIGAR interview, July 13, 2023; UN official,
SIGAR Interview, March 3, 2023; former NGO official, SIGAR
interview, March 1, 2023; UN official, SIGAR Interview, May
2, 2023.
NGO director, SIGAR interview, October 2, 2023; NGO
oficial, SIGAR interview, January 14, 2025; USAID,
“Considerations for New North Award Framework,” January
8, 2021, pp. 1–3.

102 | APPENDICES AND ENDNOTES

564 Steve Askin, “Food Aid Diversion,” Middle East Research
and Information Project website: https://merip.org/1987/03/
food-aid-diversion/ (accessed February 26, 2024), March/
April 1987.
565 USAID, “Information Memo for Administrator Mark
Green: Coordinated Suspension of USAID Assistance to
Northern Yemen,” January 31, 2020, pp. 1–2; USAID, “(SBU)
Tab 2--Operational Plan for Suspensions and Significant
Reductions of USAID-funded Humanitarian Assistance
Awards in Yemen,” January 6, 2020, p. 1.
566 USAID, “(SBU) Considerations for New North Award
Framework,” January 8, 2021, p. 2.
567 USAID, “(SBU) Tab 2--Operational Plan for Suspensions
and Significant Reductions of USAID-funded Humanitarian
Assistance Awards in Yemen,” January 6, 2020, pp. 2, 7;
USAID, “Humanitarian Assistance in Yemen: Opportunities
Exist for USAID to Further Strengthen Its Risk Management
Process,” Office of Inspector General, Audit Report 8-199-22003-P, August 23, 2022, p. 2.
568 UN official, SIGAR interview, May 2, 2023, pp. 3, 6.
569 USAID, “Humanitarian Assistance in Yemen: Opportunities
Exist for USAID to Further Strengthen Its Risk Management
Process,” Office of Inspector General, Audit Report 8-19922-003-P, August 23, 2022, p. 3; USAID, “Information Memo
for Administrator Mark Green: Coordinated Suspension of
USAID Assistance to Northern Yemen,” January 31, 2020, p.
1; USAID, “(SBU) Tab 2--Operational Plan for Suspensions
and Significant Reductions of USAID-funded Humanitarian
Assistance Awards in Yemen,” January 6, 2020, electronic
pp. 2, 7.
570 U.S. Office of Yemen Affairs Unit Riyadh, “WFP Reports
Diversion of Food Aid in Yemen,” January 19, 2019, p.
3; USAID official, SIGAR interview, July 3, 2023; World
Food Programme, “World Food Programme begins partial
suspension of aid in Yemen,” press release, June 20, 2019.
571 Department of State, “Donor Red Lines Regarding Houthi
Interference,” n.d.
572 USAID, ”Information Memo for Administrator Mark Green:
Coordinated Suspension of USAID Assistance to Northern
Yemen,” January 31, 2020, p. 2; USAID/OFDA on behalf
of Canada, DFID, ECHO, France, Germany, Netherlands,
USAID/FFP, Sweden, Switzerland, “Donor Email to INGO
Organizations in Yemen,” January 22, 2020; Department of
State, “Donor Red Lines Regarding Houthi Interference,”
n.d.; USAID Office of Inspector General, “Humanitarian
Assistance in Yemen: Opportunities Exist for USAID to
Further Strengthen Its Risk Management Process,” Audit
Report 8-199-22-003-P, August 23, 2022, p. 2.
573 Department of State, “Information Memo for the Secretary:
(SBU) Suspending Humanitarian and Development
Assistance in Northern Yemen,” February 14, 2020, p. 1;
USAID official, SIGAR interview, July 13, 2023; USAID Office
of Inspector General, “Humanitarian Assistance in Yemen:
Opportunities Exist for USAID to Further Strengthen Its
Risk Management Process,” Audit Report 8-199-22-003-P,
August 23, 2022, p. 2.
574 Department of State, “Information Memo for the Secretary:
(SBU) Suspending Humanitarian and Development
Assistance in Northern Yemen,” February 14, 2020, p. 1.
575 Department of State, “Information Memo for the Secretary:
(SBU) Suspending Humanitarian and Development
Assistance in Northern Yemen,” February 14, 2020, p. 2;
USAID, “Yemen: Complex Emergency,” fact sheet no. 12
September 30, 2020.

STAFFING THE MISSION: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. RECONSTRUCTION OF AFGHANISTAN

576 USAID, ”Information Memo for Administrator Mark
Green: Coordinated Suspension of USAID Assistance to
Northern Yemen,” January 31, 2020, p. 2.; USAID, “(SBU)
Tab 2--Operational Plan for Suspensions and Significant
Reductions of USAID-funded Humanitarian Assistance
Awards in Yemen,” January 6, 2020, electronic p. 2.
577 USAID Office of Inspector General, “Humanitarian Assistance
in Yemen: Opportunities Exist for USAID to Further
Strengthen Its Risk Management Process,” Audit Report
8-199-22-003-P, August 23, 2022, p. 4; International Rescue
Committee, “INGOS Call on USAID to End Suspension of
Humanitarian Aid to north Yemen,” August 20, 2020, p. 1.
578 Human Rights Watch, “‘Deadly Consequences: Obstruction
of Aid in Yemen During COVID-19,” September 14, 2020, p.
18; USAID, “(SBU) Considerations for New North Award
Framework,” January 8, 2021, p. 1.
579 Ashley Jackson and Nisar Majid, “Time for Change:
The Normalization of Corruption and Diversion in the
Humanitarian Sector,” Centre on Armed Groups, April 26,
2024, electronic p. 8; Colum Lynch, “Scoop: US Halts Some
Yemen Aid, Plays Diplomatic Hardball with Houthis,” Devex,
October 12, 2023.
580 USAID, “(SBU) Considerations for New North Award
Framework,” January 8, 2021, p. 1; Interagency Humanitarian
Evaluation Steering Group, “Inter-Agency Humanitarian
Evaluation of the Yemen Crisis, July 14, 2022, p. 116.
581 Ramiz Alakbarov, Humanitarian Coordinator for
Afghanistan, Letter to the Governor of Ghor Province,
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Aid, January 15, 2023.
582 NGO official, SIGAR interview, October 19, 2023.
583 Moqim Mehran, “Ghor Province: Taliban’s Embezzlement of
Aid Leaves 42,000 Needy Families,” Hasht e Subh Daily, May
10, 2023.
584 Mohammad Farshad Daryosh, “US Has Suspended
Assistance Operations in Ghor: Miller,” Tolo News, May 25,
2023.
585 William Byrd, “Ameliorating Afghanistan’s Economic
Weakness,” Lawfare, May 6, 2024.
586 Many factors contribute to individual and organizational
financial exclusion, according to the World Bank, including
“limited number of access points, high cost of financial
services, and inadequate financial services that do not meet
the needs of low-income households,” as well as “obstacles
posed by security concerns, religious and cultural beliefs,
lack of trust in the financial sector, and low rates of financial
literacy.” Financial exclusion is disproportionately higher
among women, with a meager 7 percent holding a bank
account. World Bank blog, “A Pathway to Financial Inclusion
in Afghanistan,” February 19, 2020, electronic p. 2; “Countries/
Jurisdictions of Primary Concern – Afghanistan,” State
Department website: https://2009-2017.state.gov/j/inl/rls/
nrcrpt/2014/vol2/222474.htm, last updated January 20, 2017.
587 Sarah Cliffe, Renata Dwan, Betty Wainaina, and Leah
Zamore, “Aid Strategies in ‘Politically Estranged’ Settings,”
Chatham House International Security Programme and New
York University’s Center for International Cooperation, April
2023, p. 23.
588 Patrick M. Jost and Harjit Singh Sandhu, “The Hawala
Alternative Remittance System and its Role in Money
Laundering,” Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,
January 2000, p. 6; A Report to the Congress in Accordance
with Section 359 of the Uniting and Strengthening America
by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and

589

590
591

592

593

594

595
596
597

598

599
600
601
602
603

604
605
606

607

608

Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001 (USA PATRIOT ACT), Pub.
L. 107-56, November 2002, electronic p. 6.
Patrick M. Jost and Harjit Singh Sandhu, “The Hawala
Alternative Remittance System and its Role in Money
Laundering,” Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,
January 2000, electronic p. 6.
SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress,
July 30, 2023, p. 104.
Kailey Pickitt, “Hawalas’ Role in the Financial War on
Terrorism,” Georgetown Security Studies Review, October
26, 2017, electronic p. 3.
Patrick M. Jost and Harjit Singh Sandhu, “The Hawala
Alternative Remittance System and its Role in Money
Laundering,” Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,
January 2000, p. 9.
Patrick M. Jost and Harjit Singh Sandhu, “The Hawala
Alternative Remittance System and its Role in Money
Laundering,” Financial Crimes Enforcement Network,
January 2000, p. 9.
Isabel Debre, “With Foreign Funds Frozen, Afghan Aid
Groups Struggle to Get Emergency Relief, Services,”
USA Today, September 16, 2021; ACBAR, “Barely Above
Water: Challenges of National and Local NGOs Navigating
Humanitarian Space in the New Afghan Context,” March 2022.
NGO official, SIGAR interview, March 30, 2023.
USAID official, SIGAR interview, July 13, 2023.
Matthew T. Page and Jodi Vittori, “Dubai’s Role in
Facilitating Corruption and Global Illicit Financial Flows,”
Carnegie Endowment, 2020, p. 7; Warren Coats, “The Kabul
Bank Scandal,” International Monetary Fund, 2015.
ACBAR, “Barely Above Water: Challenges of National and
Local NGOs Navigating Humanitarian Space in the New
Afghan Context,” March 2022.
Qasemi Group, “Tankhaa Services Profile,” August 2023,
electronic pp. 5–6.
Former Treasury department official, email to SIGAR, May
19, 2025.
Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview, September 14, 2023.
Afghan businessman, SIGAR interview, December 14, 2023.
Tahir Mahmood, Afaq Ali Muluk, and Seema Zubair,
“Afghanistan’s Food Security: Evidence from Pakistan and
Afghanistan Wheat Price Transmission using Threshold
Vector Error Correction Model (TVECM), Journal of
Applied Economics and Business Studies, vol. 5, issue
2, 2021, p. 2; “Revised Humanitarian Relief Plan (Jun–Dec
2023)/ Afghanistan,” UN Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, June 2023, p. 9.
Qasemi Group, “Tankhaa Services Profile,” August 2023, p. 5.
Former Treasury Department official, email to SIGAR, May
19, 2025.
International Crisis Group, “From Humanitarian Response
to Economic Recovery: recommendations for addressing
acute needs and the root causes of the humanitarian crisis in
Afghanistan,” May 2022, p. 5.
An Afghan businessman told SIGAR that during a World
Bank conference to discuss the proposed Humanitarian
Exchange Fund, participants anticipated this resistance
because of the prospect that the mechanism would replace
the cash flights. SIGAR interview, September 14, 2023;
Hardin Lang, ‘Fit for Purpose: Getting Humanitarian Aid
Right in Afghanistan One Year after the Taliban Takeover,”
Refugees International, August 2022, p. 18.
Afghan businessman in the banking sector, SIGAR interview.

AUGUST 2025 | 103

SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
SIGAR is grateful to the dozens of current and former U.S., UN, and NGO officials and
many others who agreed to be interviewed for this report.

LESSONS LEARNED PROGRAM TEAM
Nikolai Condee-Padunov, Program Manager
Tracy Content, Editor
Amy Gilmore, Student Trainee
Alyssa Goodman, Senior Analyst
Jordan Kane, Report Team Lead and Supervisory Research Analyst
Selina Nevin, Research Analyst
Jordan Smith, Student Trainee
Joseph Windrem, Director of the Lessons Learned Program

104 | ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2008 (P.L. 110-181)
established the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan
Reconstruction (SIGAR).
SIGAR’s oversight mission, as defined by the legislation, is to provide for the
independent and objective
• conduct and supervision of audits and investigations relating to the programs
and operations funded with amounts appropriated or otherwise made available
for the reconstruction of Afghanistan.
• leadership and coordination of, and recommendations on, policies designed
to promote economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in the administration of the
programs and operations, and to prevent and detect waste, fraud, and abuse
in such programs and operations.
• means of keeping the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense fully
and currently informed about problems and deficiencies relating to the
administration of such programs and operations and the necessity for and
progress on corrective action.
Afghanistan reconstruction includes any major contract, grant, agreement,
or other funding mechanism entered into by any department or agency of the
U.S. government that involves the use of amounts appropriated or otherwise made
available for the reconstruction of Afghanistan.
Source: P.L. 110-181, “National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2008,” 1/28/2008.

SIGAR
SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL
FOR AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION
2530 Crystal Drive
Arlington, VA 22202
www.sigar.mil

SIGAR 25-29-LL

WASTE, FRAUD, OR ABUSE MAY BE REPORTED TO:
U.S. Department of State Office of Inspector General Hotline
https://www.stateoig.gov/hotline
1-800-409-9926
U.S. Department of Defense Office of Inspector General Hotline
https://www.dodig.mil/Components/Administrative-Investigations/DoD-Hotline/
1-800-424-9098

