
@@URL https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/national-media-release/trump-administration-delivers-16-straight-months-zero-releases
Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
	
	
Travel 
Trade 
Border Security 
Newsroom 
About CBP 
Careers 
Employee Resources 
Home  Newsroom  National Media Release  Trump administration delivers 16 straight months of zero releases at the border
Skip to body content
Newsroom
Accountability and Transparency
Stats and Summaries
Media Releases
Documents Library
Social Media Directory
Press Officers
Legal Notices
Multimedia Libraries
Frontline Digital Magazine
Comunicados de Prensa
Announcements
Publications Catalog
Spotlights
CBP LIVE
Trump administration delivers 16 straight months of zero releases at the border
Release Date Wed, 09/16/2026

WASHINGTON — Today, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and U.S. Customs and Border Protection announced 16 consecutive months of zero releases at the border, continuing the unprecedented trend of historically low border crossings.

“Sixteen straight months of zero releases at the border proves that President Trump’s policies are working,” said DHS Secretary Markwayne Mullin. “Catch and release is over, consequences are back, and illegal crossings have fallen to historic lows. This is what a secure border looks like.”

The sustained decline in illegal border crossings and apprehensions—now at levels not seen in over three decades—shows the profound impact of robust enforcement policies. With daily apprehensions down 94% from the previous administration, the border remains more secure than at any point in history.

“Border security starts with knowing who and what is entering our country—and controlling it on behalf of the American people,” said CBP Commissioner Rodney Scott. “That means people who cross illegally are apprehended, detained and removed—not released into the United States. Our agents are enforcing that standard every day.”

Below is a snapshot of August’s key figures. Full monthly reporting can be viewed on CBP’s Stats and Summaries webpage.

Border enforcement at historic levels

Illegal crossings in August remained historically low:

U.S. Border Patrol apprehensions decreased in August
The U.S. Border Patrol’s apprehensions along the southwest border in August (8,870) were 5% lower than July. Nationwide, the Border Patrol’s apprehensions in August (10,939) were 3% lower than last month.
Southwest border apprehensions were 94% lower than under Biden
The U.S. Border Patrol’s apprehensions along the southwest border in August were 94% lower than the monthly average of the Biden administration; 97% below the peak of the Biden administration (December 2023); and less than what was apprehended in 5 days in August 2024.
Zero parole releases
The U.S. Border Patrol released zero illegal aliens in August, compared with 10,186 released by the Border Patrol under the Biden administration along the southwest border in August 2024.
Drug interdictions that save lives

CBP remains on the frontline against drug smuggling, seizing dangerous narcotics before they reach American communities.

Fiscal year drug seizures 73% higher than under Biden: CBP has seized 73% more drugs this fiscal year through August than it seized during the same period of FY 2024.
Fiscal year drug seizures 61% higher than the last four years’ average: CBP has seized 61% more drugs this fiscal year than it seized on average during the last four years in this same period.
Cocaine seizures up: Cocaine seizures increased 28%, with 6,724 pounds seized in August 2026.
Fentanyl seizures continue: Fentanyl seizures remain high, with 773 pounds of fentanyl seized in August 2026.
Significant precursor chemical seizure: CBP, in coordination with ICE, seized over 120,000 pounds of precursor chemicals used to make illicit drugs in August 2026.
Trade and tariff enforcement

CBP plays a central role in enforcing U.S. trade law and supporting economic security.

$349 billion in imports processed in August 2026.
$24.6 billion in duties identified for collection in August 2026.
Agriculture stats/seizures – securing American agriculture

In August, CBP agriculture specialists helped protect America’s agriculture, natural resources, and economic prosperity.

CBP issued 5681 emergency action notifications for restricted and prohibited plant and animal products.
CBP conducted 112,180 positive passenger inspections and issued 790 civil penalties and/or violations to the traveling public for failing to declare prohibited agriculture items.

U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) is America's frontline: the nation's largest law enforcement organization and the world's first unified border management agency. The 70,000+ men and women of CBP protect America on the ground, in the air and on the seas. We enforce safe, lawful travel and trade and ensure our country's economic prosperity. We enhance the nation's security through innovation, intelligence, collaboration and trust.

Topics
Agriculture Border Encounters Border Security CBP Commissioner Cocaine Commissioner Rodney Scott DHS Secretary Drug Seizure Fentanyl Tariffs
Last Modified: Sep 18, 2026
Media Contacts
Office of Public Affairs
CBPMEDIARELATIONS
CBP Information Center (for non-media inquiries)
(877) 227-5511
Social Media Directory

View a complete list of local and regional CBP social media accounts.

View the Directory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CBP.gov

An official website of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security

About CBP
Section 508 Accessibility
Accountability
DHS Components
Forms
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Inspector General
No FEAR Act
Vulnerability Disclosure Program
Privacy
Contact Us
Site Policies
The White House
USA.gov
Freedom 250